---
title: SLAMMAT VAN BOUGIS
citation: 1/STB 3/11 Criminele Verklaringen, 1759-1782, unpaginated.
---

Statement given, on the requisition of the honourable landdrost, Adriaan van Schoor, by the burgher Andries Nolte, of competent age, containing the following:

That during the afternoon of last Saturday, the 8^th^ of this month, the testifier, who resides on his farm situated in Roodezand, \[was waiting\] for the flock of sheep of the farmer Jan Jourdaen senior to be brought to his farm, so that he could take a wether from it for his own use. That when the testifier saw this flock of sheep approaching, he ordered the young man who lives at his place, Christiaen Smal, to go and assist the shepherd with driving them on. That hereupon the testifier went to the garden, whither he had put his slave Slammat van Bougis to work, and when he arrived there, he saw that the said Slammat, who on the previous day was also very sluggish in his work, was sitting on the ground smoking a pipe of tobacco (without getting up for the testifier). The testifier asked the said Slammat what it was with him, if he ought not to be working, whereupon the same Slammat at last stood upright, answering the testifier: “I am always working, I also have to rest a bit”, adding to this: “If *baas* wants to sell me, go ahead and do it”, whereupon the testifier took an old spade, which was in the garden, in his hand and, while saying: “*Canalje*,[^1] how dare you say that to me”, gave the said Slammat with the top part or the handle of the spade a blow on his left arm. Hereupon the said Slammat immediately stormed towards the testifier and grabbed him by his left leg, thereby pulling the testifier in this way to the ground, when the testifier suddenly saw that the said Slammat had an unsheathed knife in his hand, with which he once or twice stabbed in the direction of the testifier, without however being able to pierce him. As the testifier resisted in such a way that, during this, he again got up from the ground, and since the aforementioned Slammat was continually rushing towards the testifier with the knife in his hand, the testifier retreated backwards bit by bit and kept him from his body with the spade he held in his hand, until the testifier, in going backwards and because he was only wearing a pair of slippers, again fell down backwards; which is when the aforementioned slave repeatedly tried to attack him while the testifier, continuing to defend himself, again got up from the ground and at once proceeded to the shepherd of the aforementioned flock of sheep, in order to call for help, during which the testifier saw Slammat, who meanwhile must have gone into the house, coming from the house, having a knife in one of his hands, and a musket in the other one. Seeing this, the testifier ordered the aforementioned young man, Christiaen Smal, who was with the flock of sheep, to go and call the farmer Abraham Peltzer, who lived close by, and to warn him that he should bring a musket with him. That hereupon, while the testifier was busy catching his horse which was going knee-haltered[^2] close by the house, he saw that his house was standing alight, and that the aforementioned Slammat came running out of it, having in his hand some burning shrubs or straw, with which he first went to the tan-yard and then to the horse stable, both of which buildings the same Slammat also set alight by sticking the said burning matter in the roof or holding it against it. Upon which the testifier became most terrified and immediately set out to the farm of the aforesaid Jourdaan; and saw, with the said Jourdaan – who was already on his way when he sighted the fire on the farm of the testifier – when they returned, that his house, tan-yard and stable, with everything in them, were already lying in ashes, without being able to find the aforesaid Slammat after this, although they did find amongst the burned remains the barrel, as well as the iron ramrod, of the musket which Slammat, as mentioned before, had held in his hand.

There being nothing further to relate, the testifier asserts to be convinced of the accuracy of his statement in the text, being willing, if so desired, to subsequently confirm the above.

Thus recorded in the office of the secretary in Stellenbosch on 14 December 1759 in the presence of the deputy Coenraad Berkman and the burgher Hermanus Combrink, as witnesses.

\[signed\] Andries Nolte.

As witnesses, \[signed\] C. Berkman, Hermanus Combrink.

In my presence, \[signed\] J.J. le Sueur, secretary.

[^1]: A fairly common term of abuse in eighteenth-century Cape documents, denoting a low-life person, from French *canaille* (scoundrel) (Boshoff & Nienaber 1967: 331).

[^2]: Meaning that the horse’s legs were tied very loosely, in such a way that it could still graze, but not run away.
