---
doc_no: 1/STB 3/11
citation: Criminele Verklaringen, 1759-1782, unpaginated.
---

# JOHAN CHRISTIAN SPRING IN ’T VELD

**1/STB 3/11** Criminele Verklaringen, 1759-1782, unpaginated.

Statement given, on the requisition of the honourable landdrost, Adriaan van Schoor, by the soldier Johan Christian Spring in ’t Veld, of competent age, being of the following contents, namely:

That by eventide on the 17^th^ of this current month October 1761, on the farm of the burgher Johannes Groenewald, situated over the mountains and named the Steenboks Rivier, the testifier, who has supervision there as *knecht*, ordered a certain *Bastaard-Hottentot[^1] * called Adriaan, resident at that place, to help get the yokes ready so that they could start ploughing the following morning, which was a Sunday, which he did. On the morning of the following day, the testifier started to plough with the said *Bastaard* Adriaan and a certain slave of the aforementioned Groenewald, named Hermanus, whereupon the testifier ordered another Hottentot named Cobus, who was also there at the plough, to continue ploughing in the meantime in the place of the testifier until he, who wanted to go to the house to drink coffee, had returned. That the testifier then went into the house and had hardly poured a bowl of coffee, when the aforementioned slave Hermanus suddenly came running in, saying to him: “There are *bontebokken* in the wheat”, whereupon the testifier answered: “I shall go there now and drive them out”. The testifier then also took a rifle, went to the wheat fields and drove the said animals out. That, returning again, the testifier, while the said slave and both the Hottentots were busy outspanning the oxen, told them: “You must not yet span out, but still have to draw a furrow with the plough to lead the water to the ploughed earth, then we can start working tomorrow with making the clay”. Whereupon the Hottentot Cobus answered the testifier that the ploughshare in front of the plough-wheel had gone off, which had to be repaired, which the testifier also, after having put his gun in the house, did at once, when, after they had again started ploughing, the rope broke, which rope, after it too was repaired by the testifier, broke for the second time during the ploughing, whereupon the aforementioned slave Hermanus said: “All the work which is done on a Sunday, is of the devil, and is accursed”.[^2] Which words he repeated yet again, when the testifier answered: “At Stellenbosch too you have had to plough and sow,[^3] for three days now you have not been able to work because of the rain and it is the work of your *baas*, and not mine; when this furrow has been done, then you can stop, this is the last one for today”. Whereupon the said slave Hermanus replied: “If the *baas* knew of everything that is happening on this farm, then you would have it very bad, and I will tell the *baas* myself”, upon which the testifier said to him: “Then you have to tell me what it is”, while the said *jongen* told the testifier, again: “Yes, to send meat and butter to sick people at the warm baths,[^4] if the *baas* knew that, you would have it very bad”, whereupon the testifier again told him: “You are lying like a *canalje*,[^5] and for that I shall punish you”, upon which utterance the testifier asked the two aforementioned Hottentots if they could say that of him, which was not answered by them. The testifier then said to aforementioned Hermanus: “You have always been a tell-tale here on this farm, and you are trying to treat me as you did the other *knechten*, but I will take care of that.[^6] In the meantime I shall beat you solidly over this, and then you can go and complain to the *baas*, if you consider yourself to be in the right”, whereupon the testifier stepped towards the said Hermanus with the intention of dealing him some blows with his hand, yet before the testifier had come close, the slave came towards him, grabbed him by the hair, whereupon the testifier flicked from his head the hand of the said slave Hermanus, then threw him down on the ground and then dealt him some blows with his hand, being of the intention to let him then go free. However, when the said Hermanus had got up again, he once again reached for the testifier, saying: “You motherfucking sailor,[^7] I will get you!”, upon which the testifier again threw him down and dealt him some more blows with his hand, since he did not have anything with him with which he could defend himself at that time. The aforementioned *Bastaard Hottentot* Adriaan and the Hottentot Cobus then called to the testifier: “Come on, stop, what do you have to do with this *jongen*, let go of the *jongen* at once”, and suddenly, leaving the oxen there, they jumped behind the testifier, who then, thinking that they too wanted to attack him, quickly ran to the house where he fetched two guns, of which the one was loaded with small-shot and the other with a bullet, whereupon the testifier again went to the plough, having both guns with him, and when he arrived there, he again ordered them to continue making the said furrows, whereupon they continued ploughing in silence.

After the ploughing of the furrows had been completed, the testifier ordered them to outspan the oxen at the old house, which they also did. The testifier then commanded the aforesaid Hottentots Adriaan and Cobus to tie up the slave Hermanus so that the testifier could take him to Stellenbosch. Hereupon the Hottentots replied: “We do not want to tie him up, because when this *jongen* comes loose again, he would then stab us for it”, that the testifier in reply to this told them: “You must tie him up, or else I shall shoot your legs full of small shot”, but they still did not want to do it. However, at this moment, the aforementioned slave Hermanus and the *Bastaard* Adriaan very suddenly went to the old house, and as the testifier followed them, he called to the *Bastaard* Adriaan, who had already run into the house: “You better tie him up now”, to which he received as answer: “I cannot find him, he is already gone”, whereupon the testifier replied again: “You must bring this *jongen*, he could not have disappeared from the house”. After the testifier had watched the said house for about an hour and a half, the said slave Hermanus, together with the *Bastaard* Adriaan, came from the house towards him, while the slave said to him: “You must forgive me”, adding: “I shall never again do that to a Christian”;[^8] to which the testifier answered him: “No, *jongen*, for a long time you have had it in mind to do this to me, and you will do it to another one as well”, while the said Hermanus requested: “Let me go free then”, with the testifier saying: “No, I will tie you up” and, to the Hottentots: “Let him go, take your spades and finish the furrow, so that the water can come down”.

That upon this, the testifier went to the house, while letting the slave Hermanus walk in front of him, and, when they came to the door of the house, the same did not want to go in, but again requested the testifier to forgive him, and to let him go this once, as \[he\] would never do it again; which the testifier answered by again saying: “No, I have now made up my mind to take you to Stellenbosch”, while moreover pushing the said Hermanus forwards with the barrel of the gun and in this way entered the house, where the testifier found himself alone with the slave, ordering him to sit down in a corner of the *voorhuijs*, yet he remained standing and then, while the testifier was taking a bowl of coffee, he very suddenly ran from the house at great speed, whereupon the testifier took the gun which was loaded with shot-gun and ran after him, calling out that he should stand or otherwise he would shoot at him, but as the aforementioned slave Hermanus continued his running, the testifier shot him from behind in the legs, at which shot the said slave suddenly fell down to the ground, and when the testifier got to him and saw that he was not moving, he presumed him to be dead, notwithstanding that the testifier did not see even the least bit of blood, calling upon this both the aforementioned Hottentots and ordered them to pick up the slave and to take him into the house, which was done by them. The testifier then commanded them to fetch a horse and to saddle it up, while he meanwhile continually kept his eyes on the aforesaid Hermanus, and, seeing that the same was moving slightly, putting his hand at the side in his pocket and drawing a knife from it, the testifier very quickly leaped onto him and wrested the knife from him. The testifier then also discovered that the same had been wounded at the back with some bits of shot in his rump and legs.

That having got the horse, the testifier commanded the aforementioned Hottentots Adriaan and Cobus to take care that the wounded should not get away, nor that he should obtain a knife, that they must watch him well during his absence. After which the testifier then rode to the farm of the burgher Wessel Wesselsz. and, arriving there, asked the said Wessels if he would not[^9] \[come\] with the testifier, or otherwise let somebody else come with him to have a look at what had happened and, if so required, to help carry … The burgher Willem Brouwer, currently working at aforesaid Wessels as *knecht*, \[then\] rode with the testifier and that when they got back at the aforesaid farm, at approximately … three o’clock in the afternoon, the aforementioned two Hottentots came to meet them, saying: “\[The\] *jongen* is already dead”, whereupon … retorted: “How come this *jongen* \[be dead\], because from the shot he could not have died”, to which they again answered: “He had obtained a knife while we went outside for a while, and \[had\] stabbed himself to death”.

That the testifier, together with the aforementioned Willem Brouwer, went into the house and had the aforementioned slave Hermanus stripped naked, when they found that he was stabbed in his right side, underneath the short …, and that the testifier then had the dead body taken to the aforementioned old house. On the night of the following day, the testifier, together with the said Willem Brouwer, rode away from the aforesaid farm when the testifier, after separating from the aforesaid Brouwer, then continued his journey hither in order to report everything that had happened.

There being nothing more to relate, the testifier asserts to be convinced of the certainty of his statement as in the text, while offering to subsequently confirm this, his statement, at any time, if it may be so required.

Thus recorded at Stellenbosch on 21 October 1761, in the presence of the deputy Coenraad Berkman and the messenger of court Johan Marthinus Smalbergen, requested as witnesses hereto.

\[signed\] Johan Christian Springensfeld.

As witnesses, \[signed\] C. Berkman, J.M. Smalbergen.

With my cognisance, \[signed\] A. Faure, secretary.

[^1]: See 1752 April van de Caab, note 1 (summary).

[^2]: It appears from this sentence, and the following exchange of words, that Hermanus was unhappy about working on a Sunday. On the practice of giving slaves a day free on Sundays, see 1705 Cinna, n. 2.

[^3]: Groenewald’s main farm produced wine and was in the Stellenbosch district (J 201, Stellenbosch *opgaaf*, 1761) and this is where Hermanus had been working before. This may well have been where Groenewald was during this episode. Johan Spring in ’t Veld appears to have been working as the *knecht* manager of Groenewald’s second farm in the Caledon region, where this episode took place.

[^4]: The mineral baths at Caledon. It seems that Johan Spring in ’t Veld was selling the produce of his employer’s farm for his own profit. Since the beginning of the eighteenth century these baths were visited by people for medical purposes (Schoeman 2001: 357-58).

[^5]: On the meaning of this, see 1759 Slammat van Boegies, n. 3.

[^6]: Johannes Groenewald employed a series of *knechten* on one-year contracts. There is no record in the *knecht* hiring contracts of anyone by the name of Johan Spring in ’t Veld, although he did hire a corporal by the name of Adolph Johan Hendrik van Coller in June 1761, CJ 2897, document 24. From this statement it appears that Johan Spring in ’t Veld was a newcomer and that previous *knechten* had had a difficult time with Hermanus, or at least Johan claimed so.

[^7]: At the beginning of this document, Johan Spring in ’t Veld is said to hold the rank of soldier, but it could be that Hermanus associated *knechten* with *matrosen*, as the previous *knecht* employed by Johannes Groenewald was the *matroos* Paul Frederick Wolk van Hamburg, CJ 2896, document 41. Nonetheless, Hermanus’s insult was compounded by the fact that sailors lacked social status in comparison to soldiers or other ranks (Worden 2002a: 55-6), and it may well have been used as an insult here.

[^8]: On the use of this term to refer to Europeans, see 1792 Mentor van Mosambique.

[^9]: From here onwards, for most of this page, a small part of the side has been torn off, with the effect that one or two words are missing at the end of every line. In some cases it is possible to guess confidently which word it was if the first few letters have remained. These will be suggested in square brackets. In cases where it is impossible to hazard a guess with any safety, ellipses indicate the lacunae.