---
title: JANUARIJ VAN BOEGIES ET AL.
citation: CJ 788 Sententiën, 1750-1755, ff. 58-67.
---

Since, from the voluntary, verified confessions of Tallone van Boegies, who used to be assigned as convict to the honourable Company’s slave lodge[^1], age about 40, Jason van Boegies, bondsman of the captain lieutenant Wijnand Willem Muijs, age 36, Jephta van Boegies and Baatjoe van Balij, both slaves of the chief prison warder Hermanus Hermansz., the one aged 25 and the other 22, Fortuijn van Boegies, belonging to the Chinese Limpsinko, age 24, Pomade van Macassar, slave of the soldier Nicolaas van Blerk, age 30, September van Padang,[^2] bondsman of the chief servant of the armoury Joachim Kannemeijer, age 25, Maij van Sambouwa, belonging to the burgher Roelof Ruijgrok, age 30, Baatjoe van Boegies, bondsman of the burgher Gijsbert Rogiers, age 40, Baatjoe van Mandhaar, slave of the captain at sea, the honourable Gerrit Rijndertsz. de Vos, and April van Boegies, belonging to Hendrick Pietersz. van Gale, also 40 years old at a guess, currently their honours’ prisoners, done without torture or force of bonds, of irons, or even the least threat of suchlike, and from the other documents furnished in the case, it has appeared as clear as daylight to the honourable Council of Justice of this government:

That the prisoners agreed with one another to run away, and indeed especially on the proposal of the first prisoner, who impressed upon most of them that there had recently been a group slaves who had also taken flight and who had already arrived safely at a free village of blacks or even on Madagascar. To this end, on Saturday evening, the thirteenth of the past month February, they, numbering thirteen men, went one after the other behind the Castle, where the first and second prisoners were also appointed as their captains and leaders during the time that some of the prisoners were still arriving, after which the prisoners – except for the seventh prisoner who, since, according to what he asserts, the right person to show the way was not there, turned back again – all went together across Salt River to the side of Jan Biesjes Kraal,[^3] from where the first prisoner, being their first head and captain, sent back again the fifth and eleventh prisoners to the Cape with orders to not only fetch food for them, for the buying of which the first prisoner gave the second prisoner five *schellingen* to hand over to the fifth and eleventh prisoners, but also, as he ordered his two envoys to tell at the same time the seventh prisoner at the Cape, that he too had to come to him and his gang with the musket and gun powder, in accordance with the promise he had made. All of which was likewise ordered of them by the second prisoner, upon which order the two aforementioned prisoners then immediately set out to the Cape where, when they arrived there, the fifth prisoner gave one of the five *schellingen* he had received to the eleventh prisoner to buy bread with, but with which \[money\] the eleventh prisoner left him and went home, without getting involved again with this gang. Therefore the fifth prisoner bought bread for one *schelling* and fish for three *schellingen* and thereafter set out again on the way outside \[of Cape Town\] to the gang, but without having spoken to the seventh prisoner, who kept to the Castle, since the fifth prisoner got to the Cape at night and therefore did not have any occasion to speak to the seventh prisoner. After the fifth prisoner again found the gang at the place where he had left them, it was decided there by the first, second, third, fifth and sixth prisoners, on the proposal of the first and sixth prisoners, that in order to obtain food they had to go to the outlying farms and ask amicably for food and other necessities there but, in cases where this would be refused them, they would murder and take away everything that they could find; to which the first prisoner added that in case any one of the prisoners did not wish to do this, the first prisoner would thrash or murder him. The prisoners continued to remain in that vicinity until Tuesday, the 16^th^ of February of this year when, while they were lying asleep in the underwood, they were attacked by a commando of Europeans and were eventually forced to surrender, which the prisoners were at first by no means prepared to do, as the first prisoner, since being their first captain, leaped up with a large knife or *parrang* in his hand and encouraged them to defend themselves by shouting in Malay: *Lavang*, that is: “Defend yourself”,[^4] which order the prisoners for the most part also faithfully tried to follow, and especially the second prisoner, being their second head and captain, since he not only sought to encourage his gang to resistance by waving over his head the broadsword he had brought with him, and which he had stolen from his owner about a month beforehand, but also when two of the gang had already been shot dead, the second prisoner, as also the first prisoner, still would not give himself up as prisoner, but tried to defend himself for so long until the commando was forced to shoot at both of them and, thus injured, they were delivered, along with their other still living accomplices, of whom two more were wounded, into the hands of justice, into which the seventh and eleventh prisoners were also afterwards delivered.

All of which are abominable deeds, perpetrated by a gang of fugitive scoundrels, who left the service of their masters purely out of wantonness and petulance, and wanted wilfully and profanely to expose the inhabitants of this country to many of their already planned dangerous designs, which could truly have been of the most wicked consequences, and which therefore cannot remain unpunished but deserve to be punished most rigorously as an example and deterrent to all similar malefactors.

Thus it is, that the honourable Council of Justice, aforementioned, serving today, having seen and read with attention the written *crimineelen eijsch en conclusie* drawn up and delivered for and against the prisoners by the honourable independent fiscal, Pieter Reede van Oudshoorn, by reason of his office, as well as having noted their voluntary, verified confessions, and everything else which served the case and could have moved their honours, practising justice in the name and on behalf of the high and mighty Lords States General of the United Netherlands, as also of his most serene highness, the Lord Prince of Orange and Nassouw, as hereditary Stadtholder of the Republic our Chief Governor, Captain and Admiral General, and having judged all the prisoners, is sentencing them with this: to be taken to the place where criminal sentences here are usually executed and there to be handed over to the executioner, the first and second prisoners, Tallone and Jason, both van Boegies, to be punished with the ropes on the gallows in such a way that death will follow, thereafter their dead bodies to be dragged to the outer place of execution and there again to be strung up, to remain thus until being consumed by the air and birds of heaven; further that the nine remaining prisoners be tied to a stake, severely scourged with rods on their bare backs, and thereupon the third, fifth, sixth and seventh prisoners, by the names of Jephta and Fortuijn, both van Boegies, Pomade van Macassar and September van Padang, to be branded, after which they must be riveted in chains together two-by-two, in which each is to labour without wages on the honourable Company’s public works for a period of fifteen consecutive years; further the fourth, eighth, ninth and tenth prisoners, with the names of Baatjoe van Balij, Maij van Sambouwa, Baatjoe van Boegies and Baatjoe van Mandhaar, each for a period of five years, and the eleventh prisoner, April van Boegies, for three consecutive years to be riveted in chains, to be thus sent back home again to their masters, on condition that they pay the costs and expenditure of justice; with the sentencing of all the other prisoners to the costs and expenditure of justice.[^5]

Thus done and sentenced in the Castle of Good Hope on 18 March 1751, as also pronounced and executed on the 20^th^ thereupon.

Let the sentence be done, \[signed\] R. Tulbagh.

\[signed\] S. Swellengrebel, J. Meinertzhagen, Hendk. de Ruijter, Ns. Heijning, Cl. Brand, Corns. Eelders, Js. de Grandpreez, Am. Decker, D. d’Aillij, Jn. Raeck, H.J. Prehn, P.J. v.d. Poel.

In my presence, \[signed\] Jn. Fr. Tiemmendorf, secretary.

[^1]: *Bandieten* were convicts, many of whom were sentenced to hard labour at the Cape from VOC settlements in Asia. They were either imprisoned in the Slave Lodge, as in this case, or on Robben Island (Shell 1994: 195-97; Ward 2002: 224-74).

[^2]: Padang is a town on the west coast of the island of Sumatra.

[^3]: A well-known landmark at the Cape, this Company grazing farm was about eight kilometres north-east of the Castle, approximately where modern-day Milnerton now is (Thunberg 1986: 54).

[^4]: Since all of these slaves came from the Indonesian archipelago it is not surprising that they used Malay amongst themselves. On the use of contact languages at the Cape, see 1763 Christina Strang and 1775 Moses van de Caab.

[^5]: These sentences were those recommended in the *eijsch* (CJ 359, ff. 124v-25v) and were recorded in the *regtsrollen* after a week’s delay while the documentation was read by the Council, CJ 33, ff. 43-5 and 48-52.
