---
title: ALEXANDER VAN MACCASSER
citation: CJ 786 Sententiën, 1736-1743, ref. 97, ff. 303-11.
---

Since Alexander van Maccasser, 30 years old at a guess, bondsman of the *onderkoopman* and *negotie overdrager*,[^1] the honourable Abraham Decker, currently their honours’ prisoner, has voluntarily confessed without torture or force of bonds, of irons, or even the least threat of suchlike, and it appeared evident:

That on Saturday evening, the 14^th^ of the past month November, after having performed his usual kitchen duties, the prisoner went outside and then, according to what he asserts, drank a tot with some of his mates in the street, from which he became somewhat inebriated, and returned home at about nine o’clock in this state, and then went into the kitchen in order to roast, as he had been ordered, a paper with ham.

That as soon as the prisoner’s owner came home, he was warned that the prisoner was drunk by the slave Dorinde, who said: “*Sinjeur*, Alexander is drunk again, he beats and throws fire at me”, whereupon his said owner went into the kitchen and asked the prisoner: “Are you drunk again and inciting trouble?”, to which he gave as answer: “I am not drunk”, and to which his said owner replied: “If you had not been drunk, you would have put more fire under the grill, because with so little fire the ham will never get done within an hour or two”, whereupon the prisoner took some coal with both his hands from the hearth to put under the grill, which he did in such a vicious way that the ash flew into the paper of the ham, upon which his owner gave him some blows with his hands and a kick with his foot, besides ordering him to go to bed and the *meijd* Diana to remove the ash from the ham and to finish \[roasting\] it, after which he went from the kitchen to the front room.

That the prisoner, instead of obeying his owner’s order, searched for the big kitchen knife on top of the chimney-mantel, while saying: “I’ve hidden it here, who has taken it away?”, and when he could not find it, as the said knife had been hidden by the *meijd* Anna, the prisoner took from the kitchen table a knife with a white handle, which was one of the table knives which he had held in his hand shortly before and had laid down on the said table. With this knife the prisoner, after putting it in the pocket of his trousers, went into the *voorhuijs* to the door of the room where his owner and *juffrouw* were sitting and eating at a little table, in order, according to the prisoner’s assertion, to request forgiveness from his owner, since he had heard that the *caffers* had been called. When the slave Galant, who was standing at the said door with other slaves, asked the prisoner what he had come to do there, the prisoner gave him as answer: “I’ve come here to serve *sinjeur*”, whereupon he was answered by the said Galant: “We are standing here to serve him, you just go on to the kitchen”, as the prisoner then also did, with grumbles. However, he eventually returned to the said door and likewise answered his aforesaid owner who, upon seeing him standing there, asked him what he came to do: “I’ve come to serve *sinjeur*”, upon which the prisoner’s owner again ordered him to go and sleep, saying: “I am not used to you doing this, coming from you it can’t be good, you are usually too lazy to go and fetch half an aum[^2] of water from the pump”. He then got up from his chair and went to sit on the *rustbank* where his sword was lying and which he took into his hands. Hereupon the prisoner then indeed went from there, muttering along, to the *galderij*, and after he had walked up and down once or twice, he once again went to the small upper room, yet seeing that the door was locked, the prisoner returned to the kitchen where he found the *meijden* Diana, with her two children, and Candasa. After taking the knife from his pocket, saying: “It is time now, let come of it what may come”, he ran with it in his hand towards the said Diana, who upon this fled with her two children and the said Candasa towards the front and went through the open door onto the street, crying: “Murder” and: “Fire”.

That the prisoner, still holding the knife in his hand, likewise went to the front, saying to the aforementioned Galant, who were standing there on his owner’s orders with a pole \[of a sedan chair\]: “Wait there, I must speak to you”, but the same, with his comrade Fortuijn who was also holding a pole in his hand, retreated outside onto the stoep of the house, while saying to the prisoner: “Come on, come here”, whereupon the prisoner went up to the door of the *voorhuijs* with the knife in his hand, when he saw his owner standing on the stoep outside the door with a unsheathed sword in his hand, who said to him: “Alexander, if you have a knife or something sharp with you, throw it down”, but as the prisoner did not reply to this, his owner beat him with the sword in his face, and seeing that he had a knife with a white handle in his hand, once again told him: “Throw down the knife and give yourself up as prisoner”, but as the prisoner again did not reply, his owner gave him a blow with his sword on the hand in which he held the knife in such a manner that he was forced to drop the said knife. He was then grabbed by the slave Fortuijn and held close, with the help of the prisoner’s owner, until he was handed over with the aforementioned knife to the *burgerwacht* who arrived there, and was thus delivered into the hands of justice, although the prisoner pretended not to have planned anything wicked other than to beat the *meijden* because they had accused him of being drunk to his owner.

And since such outrageous deeds can under no circumstances be tolerated from so vile a slave in a country where justice is strictly administered, but should on the contrary, be punished most rigorously as a deterrent to other similar malefactors.

Thus it is, that the honourable Council of Justice of this government, serving today, having seen and read with attention the written *crimineelen eijsch ende conclusie* drawn up and delivered for and against the prisoner by the honourable independent fiscal, *Meester* Daniel van den Henghel, by reason of his office, as well as having noted the prisoner’s voluntary confession, properly verified, and the other documents handed over to the court, further everything having been taken into consideration that served the case and could have moved their honours, practising justice in the name and on behalf of the high and mighty Lords States General of the free United Netherlands, having judged the prisoner Alexander van Maccasser, is sentencing him with this: to be taken to the place where criminal sentences are usually executed here and there to be handed over to the executioner, to be punished in such a way with the rope on the gallows that death will follow, further that the same’s dead body be dragged to the outer place of execution, there again to be hanged up, to remain thus until being consumed by the air and the birds of heaven, with sentencing to the costs and expenditure of justice, and denying the further or otherwise demanded *eijsch* of the honourable officer.[^3]

Thus done and sentenced in the Castle of Good Hope on 3 December 1739, as well as being pronounced and executed on the 5^th^ thereafter.

Let the execution be done, \[signed\] H. Swellengrebel.

\[signed\] R. Tulbagh, J.T. Rhenius, Ns. Heijning, Cl. Brand, Mns. Bergh, Corns. Eelders, P.R. de Savoije, Js. de Grandpreez.

In my presence, \[signed\] D.G. Carnspek, secretary.

[^1]: The *overdrager* was at the head of the *negotie kantoor*, the office which controlled and administered all the trade goods of the VOC, and under whom the warehouses were administered (Haafner 1992: 171 and Wagenaar 1994: 143-44). Decker had an exemplary career in the VOC administration: he arrived at the Cape in 1717 after three years in the East Indies and was appointed clerk in the *negotie kantoor* with the rank of assistant. After he had been promoted to the rank of *boekhouder* in 1722 and to that of *onderkoopman* in 1730, the crowning achievement came after thirty years of service when he became *koopman* in 1743. He returned to Holland in 1753 (Leibbrandt 1905: 352, 365, 372 and 375).

[^2]: One Amsterdam *aam* (aum) is the equivalent of about 154 litres.

[^3]: This sentence was recorded in the *regtsrollen*, CJ 21, ff. 84-5.
