This incident one evening in the house of Abraham Decker is a good example of how circumstantial detail about slave life can be gleaned from the criminal records.[^1] Alexander van Maccasser was brought to trial for threatening his owner and the other slaves in the household with a knife. The evidence from the case is full of insights into the role slaves played in a wealthy Cape Town household: cooking, serving meals, fetching water from the pump, transporting the owner in a sedan chair, as well as giving some information about the arrangement of rooms and their functions.[^2] Also of particular note are the relationships between, and the hierarchy among, Decker’s slaves: Alexander is unwelcome serving at table and is ordered to the kitchen by a slave who is evidently in a more privileged position.

[^1]: The *sententie* given here summarises the case from the testimonies of Abraham Decker and those of his slaves: Alexander van Maccasser (incorrectly named Alexander van Madagascar, an indication of the untrustworthiness of slave toponyms), Diana van de Caab, Candace van de Caab, Galant van Samboua and Fortuijn van Bengalen, given in CJ 344, vol. 6, ff. 631-48.

[^2]: The description of the layout of rooms indicate that this was an early townhouse of a type of which no examples survive today. It seems to have included a *voorhuijs* entered directly from the street, another front room in which the owners were eating, a kitchen with a hearth, a small upper room and possibly a rear scullery or pantry. These were linked by the *galderij*, which appears to have been a linking passageway rather than, as in later Cape houses, a room behind the *voorhuijs* in which people ate and sat. We are grateful to Antonia Malan for this information.