In this case, slaves reported seeing the farmer Coenraad Appel repeatedly having sex with his stepdaughter, Elsie Anna: omnipresent slaves were well positioned to reveal the illicit actions of their owners.[^1] The admonitions of Elsie by the slave Filida, in defence of her mistress, and Elsie’s confession of her predicament, give an insight into the complex interactions of three women on the farm which transcended the divisions of slave and free and which give a rare insight into slave perceptions of their owners’ behaviour.[^2]

Appel was convicted of incest and banished from the colony, while Elsie Anna was (at the suggestion of the Council of Justice) incarcerated for life in the Company’s Slave Lodge.[^3]

[^1]: . These witnesses included both male and female slaves on the farm, although significantly it was the female Filida who showed the most concern, notably at the shame that Appel’s activities brought on his wife, Filida’s mistress.

[^2]: Elsje Anna had been baptised in 1755 and so was over twenty years old at this time (De Villiers & Pama 1966, vol. I: 10). Filida died shortly afterwards, CJ 409, vol. 4, f. 145 \[modern pagination\]. She may have been an older slave whose loyalty was primarily to Appel’s wife, her mistress, and who had little sympathy with the activities of her master and his stepdaughter.

[^3]: Coenraad Appel was charged with ‘bij reïteratie geperpetreerde overspel en bloedschande’ (repeatedly perpetrated adultery and incest), and sentenced to be whipped ‘binnens kamers’ (i.e. not in public, which was more humiliating) and banished from the colony permanently, being returned at his own cost to the Netherlands. There was little sympathy either for Elsie Anna, who was sentenced to four weeks on bread and water and subsequent imprisonment for an indefinite period in the Company Slave Lodge (or ‘whatever other place is suitable’) CJ 57, ff. 26 and 37-8, 20 April 1775. It seems as if the Lodge was being used in this way as the nearest equivalent that the court could find to the *spinhuis* (a place of hard labour which was used for women in the Netherlands and in Batavia). Both sentences were milder than the public whipping and branding that the *eijsch* recommended for them both and the life imprisonment on Robben Island recommended for Coenraad. It was also recommended that the slaves who had given testimonies against Appel be sold, although Filida had meanwhile died. The *eijsch* and testimonies of these and other slaves, as well as the interrogations of Coenraad, Elsje, and Anna Appel, are in CJ 409, vol. 4, ff. 119-213 \[modern pagination\]. The case provides an insight into the much-neglected topic of the ways in which honour and sexual shame were perceived at the Cape.