# TROMP VAN MADAGASCAR ET AL.

*The authorities were constantly alarmed by the prevalence of slave desertions, especially so, as in this case, when a large group of slaves of different owners banded together. The documentation for this case is voluminous.[^1] Each of the eleven runaways who were recaptured gave his own reasons for running away, some of them induced by others. Of particular interest is the blood oath that they took and their vow never to ‘eat the bread of the Dutch again’, which might have been a metaphorical way of saying ‘we will never be part of them/serve them again’. They planned to escape to Namaqualand, but en route fell in with a group of San, who co-opted them into attacking Khoi herders in the Piketberg region, from whom they captured cattle and sheep. They then put up considerable armed resistance before they were recaptured by a troop of Company militia. A few of the band escaped and were never heard of again.*

*Although unusual in its scale and organisation, this episode was in one way typical of slave resistance in the VOC period. The slaves did not mount a rebellion against their owners, but rather sought to escape from them and from the colony. This was more characteristic of a slave society in its early stages, when slaves were all imported, and so aware of a world of freedom outside the Cape, rather than born into slavery in the colony. Rebellions seeking to overthrow the colony never occurred at the Cape during the VOC period, possibly because of the slow rate of creolisation.[^2] Only in 1808 did a slave uprising take place which sought to overthrow the slave system of the Cape from within.[^3]*

[^1]: CJ 318, ff. 6-174. Here we reproduce the *sententie*, which summarises the events, and the interrogation of Thomas van Bengalen, one of the eleven runaways, which gives some intriguing details of the methods adopted by the group. The documentation for the case also includes the interrogations of all of the slaves involved, as well as the testimony of Jan Hendrick Munch, the soldier who led the Company troops against them.

[^2]: In this context, it means the rate by which slaves were locally-born rather than imported.

[^3]: For this shift in the nature of slave resistance in the Atlantic colonial world, see Genovese 1979, and, for the Cape, Ross 1983. Ross discusses this episode on pp. 41-2. Penn 1999: 73-99 provides the fullest analysis of runaway slaves on the Cape frontier.