---
title: FRANS
citation: CJ 2487 Inkoomende Brieven, 1776-1780, Deel 3, ff. 150-52.
---

Right honourable Lord!

Yesterday, on \[receiving\] the report of the former *heemraad* Marten Melk – viz. that during the previous evening on his farm a slave boy, 16 years old at a guess, was dangerously wounded in an accidental way by another boy of similar age while horsing around – I, together with the deputised *heemraden* and the district’s surgeon, immediately proceeded to that place and carefully investigated this case. It appeared, from both the statement of the wounded and the evidence from the other slaves, that the three slave boys of the said Melk, by the names of Rooij, Cupido and Frans, all grown fellows, almost equal in years, the two first ones \[working\] as horse hands, and the last one looking after the vineyards,[^1] got together at the horse corral the day before yesterday at eventide and got to play there, they then chased one another, and returned in this way to the house. That while doing this, they got close to the corner of the slave house and when the aforementioned Rooij got to the slave Frans, the same Rooij gave Frans playfully a blow on the back with his empty knapsack he held in his hands, upon which Frans, feeling pain, sat down on the ground by the slave house. That Rooij then asked Frans: “What is wrong with you?” and was answered by Frans: “I got injured”, upon which the said Rooij was instantly taken with fright and uttered these or similar words: “O God, I did not know that the knife was in the knapsack, I forgot about it”, as the wounded boy related himself, while adding that the said Rooij then took the cloth which Frans had around his body and dressed Frans’s wound with it as best he could. Declaring at the same time that he has never had any quarrel or disagreement with the said Rooij.

In the knapsack with which the blow was given, being old and in pieces, was the knife, which lay loose and sheathless in it, with the point sticking diagonally upwards from it to a length of three to four inches, and which had caused a wound which, according to the attestation of the surgeon, penetrated through the left shoulderblade between the two first ribs into the hollowness; although the wounded is not beyond hope of recovery. In the meantime, though, the perpetrator has fled out of fear.

Of which incident, having the honour to report to your right honourable with this, I am with obedient respect,

Right honourable Lord!

Your right honourable’s humble and obedient servant, \[signed\] O.G. de Wet.

Stellenbosch, 1 February 1780.

**CJ 2487** Inkoomende Brieven, 1776-1780, Deel 3, ff. 153-54.

Right honourable Lord!

The slave boy of the former *heemraad* Marten Melk, by the name of Frans, who, as I have had the honour of previously bringing to your right honourable’s attention, was wounded in an unexpected and accidental manner by a fellow slave of the same Melk, by the name of Rooij, in such a way that people were fearing for his life; but who has, however, according to the attached attestation of the surgeon, already recovered again by now and since the innocence of Rooij also appears fully from the statement of the wounded, also attached, I take the liberty to request with this that the said Rooij, who has since come home of his own accord and was brought here in custody, may again be released and handed over to his said owner in order to prevent further unnecessary costs for the owner.

As also respectfully asking that the honourable Neethling, during my absence and at my request in my official capacity, be allowed before the honourable deputies in the case of the burgher David Kusler to take down the necessary statements from the woman Hottentot Rosa and the Hottentot Platje who, together with their brother Afrika, came here from the Sneeubergen to this end and have urgently requested to be allowed to return again as soon as possible today to their abode, as has already been done, with my consent, by the said Afrika, who is still too young and very simple to give a proper attestation.[^2]

Otherwise I have the honour to be, with humble respect,

Right honourable Lord!

Your right honourable Lord’s humble and obedient servant, \[signed\] O.G. de Wet.

Stellenbosch, 12 February 1780.

[^1]: Probably ensuring that birds did not eat the grapes.

[^2]: This paragraph has nothing to do with the case in question, but forms part of the letter in which De Wet reports about its outcome.