This is an extraordinary case of an escaped slave who survived on his own unnoticed for twenty years in the mountains around the Franschhoek region. On recapture, he vividly recalled the events which led to his desertion. The daughter he had with the woman he called his wife,[^1] Manika van Bengalen, was severely maltreated by their owner’s wife, for unknown reasons. Reijnier was a loyal and long-standing slave, who had built up the farm by his labour, but he was taunted by other slaves for his failure to defend his daughter. He eventually cracked, attacked his owner with a knife and fled to the mountains. Twenty years later he was recaptured. By then his owners and his daughter were dead. Only Manika, now aged 60, survived. For all these years she had not known what had happened to Reijnier or whether he was still alive.[^2]

The case gives a vivid insight into psychological and emotional tensions which slave families could undergo on a remote farm, as well as the ability of an isolated runaway to survive for many years in the surrounding mountains. The story did not have a happy ending: Reijnier was sentenced to labour for life on Robben Island.[^3]

[^1]: Slaves were not permitted to marry until 1823, but in the eighteenth century those who formed permanent relationships were sometimes referred to as *vrouw* and *man*. The partnerships had no legal standing, but in the eyes of both the slaves and their owners, these bonds were matter of fact (see 1739 Cupido van Mallabaar, n. 3). Although couples could be separated from each other or from their children, this did not always prevent stable emotional relationships. On slave marriages, see Worden 1985: 57-8; Shell 1994: 288-89 and 320-24; and Schoeman 2001: 534-36 and 559-61; and, on slave families, Heese 1981. For other examples of marital or parent—child relationships, see 1721 Anthonij van Goa; 1741 Andries van Bengalen; 1742 Fortuijn van Bengalen; 1770 Jephta van de Caab; 1786 Ceres van Madagascar; and 1792 Francois de Wet.

[^2]: ‘Zij comparante ook in alle die jaaren niet het minste vernoomen, nog gehoort heeft, niet beeter weetende, of dat reeds lang overleeden ware’ (she, the testifier, also in all these years did not learn, nor hear, the least thing \[about him\], not knowing any better whether he had long passed on), testimony of Manika van Bengal, CJ 357, ff. 11-12.

[^3]: CJ 31, f. 2. This sentence was, however, more lenient than the death penalty that was usually imposed on slaves who had attacked their owners.
