---
title: REIJNIER VAN MADAGASCAR
citation: CJ 357 Criminele Process Stukken, 1749, ref. 1, ff. 7-9v, 14-15.
---

There appears before us, the undersigned delegates from the honourable Council of Justice of the Castle of Good Hope, Reijnier van Madagascar, bondsman of the heirs of the late farmer Matthijs Krugel, 60 years old at a guess, who on the requisition of the landdrost of Stellenbosch and Draakensteijn, *Sieur* Adriaan van Schoor, confesses it to be true:

That fully twenty years ago now, the confessant’s daugther, named Sabina, was daily, without any reason, thrashed by the wife of his abovementioned owner, and that his said mistress would not agree, despite the confessant’s frequent entreaties, to sell her under any circumstances but, instead of this, continually maltreated her. As, towards the evening on a certain Saturday, when the confessant came home from ploughing and asked his fellow slave Manica, who was the confessant’s wife, for the used tea leaves of his mistress, this *meijd* answered: “The *juffrouw* drank no tea today, but wine”. The said *meijd* then narrated to him how that day his mistress, after first undressing the said Sabina and having her spanned into a so-called *poolsche bok*,[^1] had again pitifully beaten her with a *sjambok*. For which reason the said Sabina had fled from the house to behind a corral, from where the confessant himself fetched her and brought her into the kitchen. Moreover, as a result of this \[beating\], the said woman slave then wanted to run away; however, the confessant told her not to do so, but that she should rather go to her owner and beg him for forgiveness. Wherefore the confessant’s fellow slaves, named Hans and Patas, seeing the continual maltreatment of his aforementioned daughter Sabina, often said to him: “You are such an old *jongen* and have helped to pay off this farm, you can plough and do all sorts of other work so well, and yet you can endure such maltreatment – if this *meijd* had been our daughter, we would have taught the *baas* differently”. And that, later on that very same Saturday evening, when both the confessant and the other slaves were all in the kitchen, the confessant’s owner entered it, holding a broomstick in his hand, and beat the *meijd* Sabina anew. As a consequence of this the confessant, out of dejection and grief, took up a knife lying on the table in the kitchen and gave his aforementioned owner three stabs with it, without being able to say where, seeing that the lamp was almost half burnt out. Upon this, the confessant immediately took flight to above the ploughed fields of his owner, where he remained for about one week, and thereafter went from there to the mountains at Franschhoek, at which place he remained for, as best he can remember, a period of sixteen years, after which he proceeded from there to the mountain situated above the farm of Jan du Busson, where he likewise remained some years, and where he was also, some days ago, captured by some Europeans, taken to Stellenbosch and then delivered into the hands of justice.

The confessant declares finally that during all of this time he had not spoken to a single person, and had maintained himself with dassies and fish, which he had caught with implements he manufactured to this end.

Thus confessed in the Dutch language, which the confessant speaks and understands reasonably well, at the Cape of Good Hope on 13 January 1749 before the honourables Cornelis Eelders and Paul Artoijs, members of the aforementioned honourable Council of Justice, who have properly signed the original of this, together with the confessant and me, the sworn clerk.

Verification

There appears before us, the undersigned delegates from the honourable Council of Justice of the Castle of Good Hope, Reijnier van Madagascar, who, after this, his given confession, had been read out word by word, clearly and plainly, declares to fully persist by it, therefore not desiring that anything more be added to or taken from it, and declares all of the above to be the whole truth.

Thus verified at the Cape of Good Hope on 14 January 1749 before the honourables Cornelis Eelders and P. Artoijs, members of the aforementioned honourable Council of Justice, who have properly signed the original of this, together with the confessant and me, the sworn clerk.

Which I declare, \[signed\] C.L. Neethling, sworn clerk.

**CJ 357** Criminele Process Stukken, 1749, ff. 14-15.

Statement given, on the requisition of the honourable landdrost, Adriaan van Schoor, by the burgher Pieter Reijnertsz., being of the following contents, namely:

That on Friday, the 3^rd^ of this month, the testifier, who has been working for some time on the farm of the farmer Jan du Buisson in Draakensteijn, understood from the cattle herder of the said Jan du Buisson that there must be deserters maintaining themselves in the vicinity of the river or the mountain, which this *jongen* presumed because he found lying there two small fish nets and some small snares with which one could catch dassies or other small animals, as also that he discovered up on the mountain, next to or beneath a rock, a hut made from shrubs. That the deponent, together with the brother of the aforesaid Jan du Buisson, named David du Buisson, and a person with the name of Schellenberg, who is a *knecht* of the said Jan du Buisson, went out that very afternoon to the mountain, taking with them, in order to point out this hut, the aforementioned cattle herder and yet another slave of Jan du Buisson. That not far from this hut, they kept watch throughout the night and, when they searched it by day, they found nothing but small snares which had been laid there. However, when they searched together around the area, the aforementioned cattle herder espied a *jongen*, of which he immediately warned the testifier and the party with him. That they then all went there together, finding, about a couple of hundred paces from the aforementioned hut, towards the Draakensteijn mountains, a slave, who was at once asked by the burgher David du Buisson if he was Reijnier of Matthijs Krugel, to which the same answered: “Yes!”, adding that he had been supporting himself in the mountains for about seven or eight years and that he had maintained himself with trapped dassies and fish from the Berg River, whereupon they took this slave Reijnier prisoner and brough him to the prison in Stellenbosch.

There being nothing more to declare, the testifier asserts to be convinced of the accuracy of his statement as in the text, being willing, if it may be required, to subsequently confirm the aforegoing, at any time.

Thus related at the office of the secretary in Stellenbosch on 8 January 1749 in the presence of the lay reader Abraham Faure and the messenger of the court Hendrik van Ellewe, requested as witnesses hereto, who have properly signed the original of this, together with the testifier and me, the secretary.

Which I declare, \[signed\] A. Schephausen, secretary.

[^1]: The *poolsche bok* was a way of tying somebody up: the hands are tied together and put over the drawn-up knees, after which a stick or something like it is inserted under the knees and across the arms, thereby rendering a person totally defenseless. Slaves were usually undressed before being tied up like this and then whipped. For an explanation of the name and for further examples of this vicious punishment, see Franken 1953: 109-12. The punishment had been in use at the Cape since the seventeenth century and was also known in colonial Surinam (Stedman 1992: 556 and 665). Franken suggests that it might have developed from a punishment meted out on ships.
