# JAN BOTMA

*In two separate, but remarkably similar, cases in 1729, Stellenbosch burghers were each found guilty of causing the death of one of their slaves by excessive punishment. Here we print the records from one of them.[^1] Jan Botma confessed to ordering the beating of his slave Joseph van Malabaar (the job was performed by other slaves), but the precise cause of Joseph’s death remained unclear. Much was made of the fact that he drank rain water from the ground after his beating – over-consumption of water when the body was heated after a beating was believed to be a cause of illness and possibly death.[^2] The surgeon reported that none of the wounds on Joseph’s body were ‘mortal’ and his verdict was death by drowning. The court nonetheless found Botma guilty of causing the death of his slave by excessive whipping, although he stated that he was not aware he had done any wrong. Unlike Jan de Thuilot, who was sentenced to death in 1708 for killing a slave (see case above), Botma was fined 100 rixdollars and ordered to pay costs.[^3] That he was not let off completely shows that the Company regarded maltreatment of slaves leading to death as a punishable offence.[^4]*

[^1]: The other burgher was Jan Steenkamp, who claimed that he had only allowed his slave Hector to be whipped for ‘niet langer als een pijp tobacq rookens’ (no longer than it takes to smoke a pipe of tobacco). He was fined 50 rixdollars, CJ 11, ff. 49-50. See Schoeman 2004: 204-6 for a discussion of the Steenkamp case.

[^2]: See 1740 Daniel Lourich, n. 8 for evidence of this opinion.

[^3]: CJ 11, ff. 48-9. There is no *sententie* for this case. The *eijsch* recommended that Botma be banished from the Cape for ten years as an example to others (CJ 333, f. 267), but this was not upheld by the court. The fiscal argued that Botma, as former *heemraad*, should have known better. For comments on this case, see Biewenga 1999: 58.

[^4]: Only two years later, in 1731, a *plakkaat* was issued against the maltreatment of slaves, which commented on recent cases in which owners had murdered their slaves, *Kaapse Plakkaatboek* II: 149-50. The immediate cause of this was a horrific case of sadistic abuse of a slave by his owner, Christiaan Gottlieb Opperman (Shell 1994: 208), but clearly the authorities also had cases like that of Jan Botma in mind. For discussion of punishment of owners for the murder of their slaves, see 1707 Jan de Thuilot.