This is a case of attempted arson of his owner’s wine store by a slave. While collective slave rebellion was difficult to organise at the Cape, individual acts of resistance such as this were much more frequent. There are many cases of arson in the court records: setting fire to crops or to the thatched roofs of houses was relatively easy in the dry summers of the western Cape.[^1] The authorities were well aware of the danger and issued numerous *plakkaten* warning against the dangers of possible fires and the punishments for arson.[^2] They severely punished culprits with sentences that often included death by burning alive or scorching, designed to impress upon spectators the horror of fire and the fate that awaited arsonists.

Aaron van Bengalen’s action was clearly not planned over a period of time, but appears to have been the desperate culmination of a series of events which got out of control. His attempted suicide is a sign of his desperation and bears some resemblance to the patterns of running *amok*, or attacks on people and property followed by self-destruction, that occasionally were carried out by slaves from the East Indies.[^3]

[^1]: Slave arsonists caused serious damage in Cape Town in 1736 and 1798, and in Stellenbosch in 1710. For discussion of arson as a form of slave resistance, see Worden 1985: 132-33;, Ross 1983: 54-5; Heese 1994: 102-4 and Shell 1994: 265-84. Shell argues that fear of slave arson influenced vernacular architecture, with restrictions on the use of thatched roofs in Cape Town and the design of special *brandzolderen* (fire ceilings) in rural houses. For other examples of arson, see 1706 Ari; 1736 Table Valley Slaves; 1742 Fortuijn van Bengalen; 1759 Slammat van Boegies and 1794 Abraham van Macassar.

[^2]: For example, *Kaapse Plakkaatboek* II: 52-3 and 62-3 (1715), 125 (1727), 160-61 (1735), 191 (1740), 196-97 (1741).

[^3]: See 1744 Barkat van Timor, n. 2 for discussion of this phenomenon.
