This is an unusual case, since the recommendation of the landdrost that the accused slave be sentenced to death was overturned by the Council of Justice.[^2] Alexander van Couchin was accused of threatening to attack his owner, but he made no actual assault. Tensions were running high on this Klapmuts farm and the case reveals the complex conflicts of interest between the slave-owner who wants to whip one of his female slaves, on the one hand, and his wife, one of his slaves and the* knecht *working on the farm, on the other. It is not clear whether Alexander was acquitted because the court had some sympathy with his circumstances or because the evidence was unclear. It is striking that, although rejecting the death sentence, the court did not impose any punishment at all, but neither did it order him to be sold to prevent his owner from retaliation, as was usually done in such cases.[^3]

[^1]: Cochin on the Malabar coast. In another case in which he appeared as a witness in 1746, he is named Alexander van Mallebaar, an indication of the variability of slave toponyms, 1/STB 3/8, 24 January 1746.

[^2]: The landrost called for the death sentence by hanging, on the grounds that the Statutes of the Indies mandated death for all slaves who laid hands on their owners. He recognised that Alexander had not actually attacked his master, but pointed out that he had threatened to do so with a knife, being a ‘verwoedenend mensch’ (enraged person) and that such ‘booswigten’ (villains) were widespread in the colony and could not be tolerated, CJ 346, ff. 112v-13.

[^3]: The court decided after perusing the evidence that Alexander be freed and returned to his owner, but gave no reasons, CJ 23, ff. 38-9. The documentation included the material transcribed here, as well as the evidence of three of the other slaves on the farm, Silvia van Madagascar, Pieter van de Cust Coromandel and Isaac van de Cust Coromandel, CJ 346, ff. 117-28. Alexander was still on the farm in 1746 when he gave testimony in another case on Daniel van der Lith’s farm concerning the maltreatment of the Khoi worker Claas by another *knecht*, Christoffel Esterhuijsen Willemsz, 1/STB 3/8, 24 January 1746.
