# THOMAS VAN TUTOCORIJN

*In this case, Thomas van Tutocorijn, a 40-year-old slave who had lived since his childhood on the same farm,[^1] attacked first one of the house slaves, Gedult, and then threatened his owner, the widow Adriana Debits. The case is interesting for the details it gives of the distinction between different slaves on this large Koeberg farm.[^2] Gedult was described as an ‘old house slave’ who slept in the main house, while the others were in separate slave quarters.[^3] Adriana Debits questioned why some of the latter should be sleeping in the main house. The evidence thus suggests a distinction between house slaves and farm slaves which was characteristic of large slave plantations in the Americas, but was not universal on the smaller farms of the Cape.[^4]*

[^1]: CJ 397, f. 38v, interrogation of Thomas van Tutocorijn, article 2.

[^2]: In addition to the *sententie* given here, the documentation in the case includes the *eijsch*, testimonies of Adriana Debits, Gedult van Ceijlon and Eva van de Caab, notes from the questioning of the slave Abraham and the interrogation of Thomas van Tutocorijn, CJ 397, ff. 1-57.

[^3]: There were eleven slaves altogether, ten males and one female, CJ 397, f. 38v, interrogation of Thomas van Tutocorijn, article 3. It seems that only Gedult and Eva slept in the main house, although it is not clear from the evidence whether this was a sexual relationship or merely one of common sleeping arrangements. It was quite common for female slaves to sleep in the kitchen (there were usually only one or two on many farms) but it was more unusual for men. Since in this case only one man was allowed to do this, it seems to have been a special privilege.

[^4]: For example, Genovese 1970: 327-65 on the United States and Worden 1985: 90 on the Cape. Examples, in this collection, of house slaves on Cape farmsteads are Hector van de Caab (in 1786 Augustus van de Caab et al.), Adam (in 1786 October van Madagascar et al.) and possibly also Alij (in 1776 Julij van Timor). This case is rather ambiguous. Thomas’s scornful reference to Gedult as ‘een oude huijsjongen’ (an old house *jongen*) shows a perceived distinction, while his expectation that Gedult should prevent fighting between the others slaves suggests that Gedult had a supervisory role over them. This might have been because his age gave him authority (as with September in 1760 Achilles van de West Cust et al.). However, the fact that Gedult is ordered by his owner to clay the threshing floor with Thomas shows that work was not strictly partitioned between them. The separation of sleeping places is a more striking divide.