In this letter, the landdrost of Stellenbosch reported a fight with a tragic ending on a farm in the Wagenmakersvallei and asked the Council of Justice how to proceed in this unusual case. The incident is of note for several reasons. The fight, involving slaves and a Khoi worker, broke out over disputed ownership of bamboo canes that were growing in garden plots assigned to individual slaves, and the court seems here to have recognised their claims to its produce.[^1] Moreover, the case unusually shows an elderly slave and his adult son on the same farm, and gives a rare insight into family relationships amongst slaves.[^2]

Jephta’s attempt to defend his father led to his accidental killing of the old man. The fiscal was uncertain how to proceed with such strongly mitigating circumstances and although the court could not definitively say what had happened, it did not see fit to punish any of the participants.[^3]

[^1]: In some transatlantic plantations producing non-food crops, it was common for slaves to be given their own plots of ground on which they could grow food in their spare time, both for their own consumption and for sale (Genovese 1970: 535-40). Although this practice was not widespread on Cape farms, where grain and meat were the main produce, slave garden-plots were found in some cases (Kolb 1777, vol. II: 306; Mentzel 1944: iii, 110; Worden 1985: 91-2; and Mason 1994: 76-83).

[^2]: For other examples of slave families, see the references in 1749 Reijnier van Madagascar, n. 1.

[^3]: The case came before the court on 12 April 1770 and was held over while the documentation (which included the testimonies of Pandek van Maccasser and Anna Maria Bruijning, the interrogations of Dirk and Jephta and a surgeon’s report, CJ 397, ff. 172-99) was circulated among its members. On 10 May 1770 it was agreed that Caesar’s death appeared to have been accidental (‘een casus fortuitus’), but that the slaves Jephta and Pandek should be returned to their owner with the order that they should not be sold without first informing the court, and that the Khoi Dirk be retained in case he could shed any further light on the matter, CJ 52, ff. 32-3 and 45-8.
