---
title: ARI
citation: CJ 2961 Minuut Justitieële Attestatiën, Actens etc., 1706, ff. 73-76.
---

Today, 28 May 1706, there appears before me, Abraham Poulle, secretary of the honourable Council of Justice of this government, in the presence of the witnesses named below, Jacobus van der Heijden, *heemraad* of Stellenbosch, who, on the requisition of the honourable independent fiscal Joan Blesius, declares it to be true:

That about two months ago, he was detained in the prison for twelve successive days with a certain slave named Ari, who in various conversations declared to the deponent that during his childhood years \[in the area\] between Suratte and Persia, when he was playing on the beach, he was carried off by the Dutch and was eventually sold as a slave. That when the deponent then asked the aforementioned Ari for what reasons he was sitting there in the prison, he answered that he had run away because of the maltreatment by his *baas*, Jan Lourensz of Rostok (alias the son-in-law of Trijn Ras), and his wife, with the intention never to return again because he was tired of life. He, Ari, went from there to the farm of Trijn Ras, situated across the Berg River, and found there two *jongens*, whom he told of his complaint and who gave him a piece of bread and a piece of tobacco, saying thereafter that he should take them and go and that they were not able to support him, nor to give him food. That he then went from there to the mountain named the Parel Diamand, and into the vineyard of the widow Barent Burghard, where he cut some bunches of grapes and consumed them, after which he went from there to the vineyard of Guilliam Frisnet where he, when sitting down in a ditch next to or under a rock, heard some creaking or rustling, whereupon he went towards it and found or met there three *jongens* who were likewise busy consuming young grapes. That he, Ari, was asked by one of these three *jongens*, whom he did not know then, and still does not, but heard being called by the name of Anthonij: “What are you doing here?”, to which Ari replied: “What are you doing here?”, to which Ari was answered: “We are looking for food here, we have already run away, we think you have too”, whereupon they together formed an alliance. That Anthonij then said to him, Ari: “The weather is right now and the wind strong for setting fire to houses”, and immediately added to this: “Come, let us set this house alight”, whereupon Ari said: “I have no fire”, and received as answer from Anthonij: “We have sufficient fire”. That together with Anthonij he left the other two *jongens* there and went to the house, and that when Anthonij struck fire, he handed Ari half of the burning tinder and told him, because he was dawdling with it: “Hurry up, or else the fire will go out”. That hereupon Ari threw the burning tinder onto the thatched roof, while Anthonij shoved what remained of the burning tinder into it \[the thatch\], upon which the house instantly caught flame. That while the house was burning, Anthonij made noise on the door and when it was opened forthwith, Anthonij jumped in and took a gun from there. That after this, they again went to the others and fled up the mountain, where they took him, Ari, to a deserted little farm and took him into a hut made from shrubs, where they gave him to eat a cold piece of mutton which had been roasted in ash and which they kept there. After about half an hour expired, the other three *jongens* fell asleep, when Ari silently took away the gun from their leader because he was afraid that the same might kill him, and fled with it to beyond the house of the aforementioned widow Burgert \[*sic*\], where he laid down to rest by a rock and was apprehended there that same day by the shepherd of the widow Burgert.

There being nothing more to declare, he asserts to be convinced of the truth of his statement as in the text, offering to confirm the same (if needed and requested to it) with confirmed oaths.

Thus done and recorded in the Castle of Good Hope, in the presence of Nicolaes van Leeuwen and Jan Snip, requested hereto as witnesses of faith.

\[signed\] Jacob van der Heijde \[*sic*\].

As witnesses, \[signed\] N. v. Leeuwen, the son of Nicholas; J. Snip.

With my cognisance, \[signed\] A. Poulle, secretary.