This account of the experiences of the slave Ari is reported by one of his fellow prisoners, the free burgher Jacobus van der Heijden.[^2] Ari’s story is revealing on several counts.[^3] It is one of the very few sources which gives an indication – however fleeting – of how a Cape slave had originally been captured in Asia. It then gives insights into the tense relationship between a lone deserter and other slave runaways he encountered, in which competition for food and rivalries over leadership played a part. Some details are given on how arson, a frequent means of slave resistance, was carried out.[^4] The text is also of great linguistic interest, since the reported words of the slaves provide some of the earliest forms of the restructuring of Dutch at the Cape which eventually resulted in the formation of Afrikaans.

Ari was subsequently tortured and confessed, though he also blamed the other slaves who had encouraged him to commit arson, and he was placed on Robben Island in heavy chains ‘until he was more informative’ about his accomplices and pending sentence.[^5] He died there in 1708.[^6]

[^1]: In other documentation for this case, Ari is named ‘van Bengalen’ but, as this document makes clear, he originated from the region ‘between Suratte and Persia’ (modern Pakistan). He may well have been taken by his captors to Bengal, a region from which the VOC obtained many slaves, although we have no details of this. This case thus serves as a warning that slave toponyms may indicate the place of sale to the Dutch, rather than the actual area of slave origins.

[^2]: Jacobus van der Heijden was in the ‘Swart Gat’ prison for his part in the burgher conflict with the governor Willem Adriaan van der Stel. In the so-called *Contra-Deductie*, which the rebellious burghers wrote shortly after this, and in which the illegal imprisonment of Van der Heijden was considered proof of Van der Stel’s corruption and maladministration, he refers to Ari as his ‘confrater’ (fellow brother) in prison, and mentions that while being locked up, he taught the slave the Ten Commandments and the Lord’s Prayer (Franken 1953: 87). After Van der Stel’s recall in 1708, Van der Heijden obtained the meat *pacht* and became one of the most prosperous and influential residents of the colony (Schoeman 2002a: 156, 158).

[^3]: For a discussion of this case, see Franken 1953: 87-96 and Schoeman 2002a: 156-58. Schoeman provides an Afrikaans translation of Van der Heijden’s evidence.

[^4]: On arson and its function in slave resistance, see 1717 Aaron van Bengalen.

[^5]: As recorded in the *regtsrollen*, CJ 4, ff. 279, 285 and 328. This testimony of Van der Heijden is followed by an (incomplete) interrogation of Ari, done in the torture room, and his confession (CJ 2961, ff. 77-82). A document entitled *eijsch en conclusie ad torturam* is preserved in CJ 309, ff. 41-3 \[modern pagination\] which justified why Arij should be tortured. On 10 August 1706 the fiscal suggested that since he refused to name his accomplices, Ari be sent to Robben Island ‘met een sware keeten en block aan bijde beenen gehegt aan een ijsere kraag om den hals’ (with a heavy chain and block on both legs connected to an iron collar around the neck). The court concurred and decided that Ari should remain detained there until he had provided the information and a sentence could be passed, CJ 4, vol. 1, f. 328.

[^6]: Ari died on Robben Island in 1708, still without having received sentence. The superintendent wrote to the governor that he had buried him with the chains still on him, since the previous governor had given strict orders that Ari should never be allowed to go about without the chains, C 383, ff. 315-18.
