Sexual contacts between slaves and their owners were viewed with disfavour by the authorities, and sometimes, as in this case, by other slaves as well.[^1] The 26-year-old Lindor van Mallebaar was reported to his owner by a fellow slave who saw him with the 22-year-old daughter of his owner in highly compromising circumstances. Although Lindor avoided the death penalty by his claim that it was her incitement that led to the incident, he was sentenced to life on Robben Island for his actions.[^2]

[^1]: For a discussion of sexual relations between colonist women and their slaves, see Upham 2001a.

[^2]: The documentation in this case includes the *eijsch*, the testimony of Jephta van Batavia, which was a copy of that transcribed here, the interrogation of Lindor van Mallebaar (who is referred to in the index as Lindor van Bengalen, either a clerical error or an indication of the fluidity of slave toponyms), CJ 447, ff. 491-507 as well as a *sententie*, CJ 796, ff. 267-72. Lindor stated in his interrogation that Mietjie had come and sat on his lap of her own accord and that he had pushed her off but that she persisted. He confessed that he had twice had sexual contact with her, on her intitiative, CJ 447, ff. 504-6, articles 7-15. The case was brought to the Council of Justice on 12 September 1793 when Lindor responded to the charge by saying ‘het is de nonje haar schuld’ (it was the *nonje*’s fault), CJ 75, f. 195. The case was held over for consideration until 7 October, when Lindor was sentenced to be placed under the gallows with a rope around his neck, then to be whipped and branded and to work in chains on Robben Island for life, CJ 75, ff. 194-95 and 209-10. This was a mitigation of the recommendation of the *eijsch* that Lindor should be hanged (CJ 447, f. 496); it appears that Lindor had succeeded in persuading the court that the episode was not entirely his fault.
