# ACHILLES VAN DE WEST CUST ET AL.

*This is one of the most complex and revealing cases about slavery in the criminal records of the Council of Justice.[^1] It involved what one historian has described as a ‘minor slave uprising’, in circumstances that greatly alarmed the authorities and colonists.[^2]*

*The events involved a group of slave runaways on Table Mountain who fought pitched battles with the burghers. They sent particular panic through Cape Town when some of them, inspired by the revenge of Achilles van de West Cust against his owner, murdered Michiel Smuts and his family in their Oranjezicht home.[^3] After a series of encounters with other slaves and skirmishes with commandos, some were killed (and some summarily executed on the spot). Januarij van Boegies, the sole survivor of the original gang, was brought to justice, together with eleven other slaves who had later joined it or provided it with food or support. The original group of runaways on Table Mountain had drawn over twenty slaves into its net by this time.*

*A particularly intriguing aspect of the case is the role played by one of the slaves, September van Boegies, whose interrogation is transcribed here along with the* sententie*. Called ‘father’ by the others, he was clearly a figure of authority, both because of his seniority in age and because of his traditional Bugis medical knowledge. His interrogation is unusually revealing of the cultural and social worlds of Southeast Asian slaves at the Cape, including notions of kinship, medicine, language and concepts of time.*

*Included in the court records is an intriguing document – a letter in the Bougies language, written to September by another slave from Bougies, one Upas, who lived in Stellenbosch.[^4] The content had nothing to do with the case in question, but even the possession of a letter written in a strange script and language from one Bougies slave to another was considered by the authorities to be suspicious, especially since they feared that reading and written communication amongst slaves might facilitate an uprising.[^5] On the basis of this evidence, September was accused of fostering revolt among the Bougies slaves of the colony, and this was as alarming to the authorities as the attack on the Smuts family. This accounts for September’s gruesome execution: he had played no part in the attack on the Smuts homestead, although he had subsequently provided the runaways with food and medical assistance.*

[^1]: The documentation for the case includes the *eijsch*, the testimonies of each of the accused (including Baatjoe van Bougies, who died in prison before judgment was given) as well as those of Fortuijn van Bengal and Baatjoe van Balij, Michiel Smuts’s surviving slaves, CJ 373, ff. 43-143.

[^2]: Cairns 1980b: 15. For historical analysis of different aspects of the whole episode, see Ross 1983: 19-20 and Koolhof & Ross 2002. The murder led to an immediate banning of slave wood-collecting on the mountain, the enforcement of controls over slaves gathering in Cape Town streets at night without lanterns, and the requirement that they carry letters from their owners showing that they had permission to be out of their owner’s sight (*Kaapse Plakkaatboek* III: 30-1). The ban on wood-collecting was rescinded on 7 August (*Kaapse Plakkaatboek* III: 31-2), but slaves were ordered to report sightings of any runaways on the mountain. The fear of a Bougies-inspired uprising in this and subsequent cases involving East Indian slave resistance confirmed the stereotype of Bugis slaves as ‘treacherous’, and contributed to the (ineffectual) banning of the further importation of East Indian slaves to the Cape in 1767. *Plakkaten* to enforce this had to be periodically issued, *Kaapse Plakkaatboek* III: 164 (1784) and IV: 80-1 (1792); see discussion for causes of this ban in Worden 1985: 44 and Shell 1994: 43 n. 8 and 233.

[^3]: Michiel Smuts was a Company official with the rank of *boekhouder* who lived with his family in a house on the slopes of the mountain. Stories of the family murder continued to be told until well into the twentieth century, Cairns 1980b.

[^4]: CJ 373, bound between ff. 141 and 142. It is translated (rather inaccurately according to Koolhof & Ross 2002) into Malay and Dutch, CJ 373, f. 142. The letter, along with the Dutch and Malay translations, is printed in Franken 1953: 67-9. For another Bougies letter in the criminal records, see 1786 Augustus van de Caab et al.

[^5]: It was a request for medical assistance. It was not even clear to the court whether September could read and write, and he himself claimed he could not. Koolhof & Ross (2002) point out that the meaning and interpretation of the letter were misinterpreted both by the court and by later historians. The possession of a Bougies letter was also viewed with suspicion and alarm in 1786 Augustus van de Caab et al.