This dispute took place at Elsenburg, the large wine farm owned by Marten Melk, one of the richest burghers in the colony.[^1] Melk employed his slave Willem as a *mandoor*,[^2] a slave who was placed in charge of the other slaves and had the authority to punish them. Willem beat Frans when he found him drunk and ordered him back to work. Frans later took his revenge by killing Willem with a *kirrij* blow. Frans then ran away, but was caught several days later in the Swellendam district.

The case is interesting for the details it gives of the slave living quarters on Melk’s farm, with separate sections for the male and female slaves.[^3] Willem, in the privileged position of *mandoor*, slept in the women’s quarters.

[^1]: Marten Melk was extremely active as an entrepreneur and businessman from the late 1740s onwards and amassed a fortune by the time of his death in 1781, not least because he dominated the lucrative wine trade for more than 20 years. He came into possession of the farm Elsenburg, close to Stellenbosch, by marrying the widow Anna Hop in 1752, thereby greatly improving his fortune. On his life and activities, see Cockrell 2001.

[^2]: *Mandoors* were used in the Company Slave Lodge. Shell (1994: 180-85) suggests they were mulattos who had been raised in the Lodge. There is no toponym given for Willem, which may suggest that he was a locally-born slave who would have been well known to Melk and trusted by him. *Mandoors* were rarely used by the free burghers, and usually only on the largest farms, such as Elsenburg, or on cattle posts or smaller farms away from the owner’s main residence. They were usually given special privileges, see Ross 1983: 29-30 and Worden 1985: 88-9, 107-8.

[^3]: While during the 1760s arable farmers in the Stellenbosch district possessed on average fewer than ten male slaves (Worden 1985: 29), Melk was in the exceptional position of owning between 110 and 120 during this period (Cockrell 2001: 105). Such a large number of slaves not only meant that he could afford to have specialist slaves, like the *mandoor* (and also cooks, artisans, wagonmakers, etc.), but also that special housing was needed for them. Contemporary visitors to Elsenburg called it a ‘little village’ as it contained numerous workstores, warehouses, cellars, corrals and other out-buildings. In addition, there were two slave houses and a slave school (Fagan 1984: 35-37).
