This episode shows that runaway slaves could not always rely upon other slaves to help them.[^1] Titus escaped from his rural owner in Roodezand[^2] to Cape Town, but was given up to the authorities by some of the Company slaves to whom he appealed for help. The case is also interesting for the details that it provides of the housing of slaves at the Company brickworks. They stayed in a hut near the furnace, not in the Slave Lodge in town, perhaps because they needed to tend the furnace during the night.[^3]

[^1]: For other cases in which slaves support the law rather than other slaves, see 1709 Samel and 1726 Scipio van de Cust.

[^2]: Assuming that Roodezand here refers to the pass leading to the Land van Waveren, the distance between it and the Castle in Cape Town was 24 Amsterdam miles or 178 kilometres (Valentijn 1971, vol. I: 204). According to Böeseken and Cairns (1989: 19) it took 18-20 hours to cover this route on horseback, and so would have involved several days of walking for Titus.

[^3]: The documentation for this case includes the *eijsch*, and testimonies by Titus and two of the Company slaves, Coetoe and Claas, CJ 370, ff. 167-76. Titus’s testimony states that he went to the Company brickworks at 6 a.m. on a Sunday morning, although Coetoe and Claas claim it was during the night. Titus also adds one interesting detail: he went to Cape Town after his escape in order to see his child, who was a slave of the burgher Burgert Reijner (CJ 370, f. 170). This is a glimpse of the network of slave kin which existed across the colony. For another example of a slave escaping to visit kin living at a distance, see 1705 Cinna.