This conflict between three Khoi herdsmen, on the one hand, and a slave, on the other, shows the tensions and conflicts of status and authority that could arise on the many burgher farms where both slave and Khoi labourers worked.[^1] The 17-year-old Khoi Varken objected to the way in which the slave Titus scolded and beat him, and found immediate support from his fellow Khoi herders. We do not know anything about Titus, but it is likely that he was older than the young Khoi labourers and that this gave him authority over them. There is no indication that the owner-employer Adriaen Louw objected to Titus’s behaviour, and he might have encouraged or even ordered the slave’s role as overseer over the young Khoi workers. Not all slaves were of lowest status, especially in comparison to Khoi workers. Varken’s violent reaction might have been a personal feud with Titus, but it was doubtless also compounded by the anger or shame he felt, as a legally free Khoi, at being harshly treated and controlled by a slave.[^2]

The punishment of the Khoi, two of whom were sentenced to death, is an indication of their full incorporation into the judicial apparatus of the Company’s colony. The Khoisan were losing claims to independent sovereign status by this period and certainly those working on colonial farms, even on the colony’s frontiers, were firmly under the authority of the settlers and the Company’s legal apparatus.[^3]

[^1]: The *eijsch* and testimonies by Varken, Toontje and Ruijter, as well as those of the farmers Jacobus Louw Jacobsz and Daniel Bockelenberg, are available in CJ 339, ff. 146-65. The farm was located in Jakhalsvalleij, which probably refers to the area southwest of Clanwilliam, near the modern settlement of Jakkalsvlei. This was on the northern frontier of the colony in 1735. Khoi labourers were more widely used in this region than in the more settled arable parts of the colony, especially as stock herders. See 1724 Andries van Ceijlon for the use of both Khoi and slave labourers on farms.

[^2]: In the *regtsrollen* Varken and Toontje stated that they had killed Titus ‘omdat haar gedaagdens geduurig quaad deed en bekennen daarover dood waardig te sijn’ (because he continually treated them badly and they admit that they deserve death because of this, i.e. the murder of Titus). Ruijter persisted in denying that he had helped to murder Titus, CJ 17, f. 37.

[^3]: Robert Ross (1993: 166-80) has argued that the gradual incorporation of the Khoisan into the Cape legal system was as much a marker of their loss of independence as was their loss of land and livestock. Whereas in the seventeenth and early eighteenth centuries, conflicts between Khoi were usually not dealt with by the Company and were handed over to Khoi chiefs or ignored, by the middle of the eighteenth century this was no longer possible or desirable. From the late seventeenth century, whenever Khoisan conflicted with settlers or slaves, as in this case, they were subject to the laws and sentences of the Council of Justice.
