The evidence in this case was collected by the Stellenbosch landdrost after he received a complaint by the slave David van de Caab about the actions of his owner, Francois de Wet. David accused De Wet of causing the deaths of the young child of the slave Jacomijn, David’s partner, and, three years earlier, that of his sister, Stijn.

The case shows the difficulties encountered by a slave family. David formed part of a slave kinship network on the farm, albeit one which was devastated by the actions of his owner. Jacomijn, as a young mother, had been working as a wet nurse on another farm and was accused of neglecting her own child. Stijn had tried to abort her child and was whipped for being the suspected carrier of a venereal disease.[^1]

It appears that no action was taken against De Wet. Possibly the landdrost considered that the evidence was uncertain, and that Stijn may have died from her attempted abortion.

[^1]: Infanticide was a form of resistance amongst slave women, since it deprived their owners of the benefit of new slave property, although its emotional and psychological effects on the women should not be forgotten. Venereal disease was widespread in the colony, not least because of its spread by sailors and soldiers aboard vessels visiting Table Bay. The authorities attempted, somewhat ineffectually, to control infanticide especially, for example *Kaapse Plakkaatboek* II: 171 (1740) and 246-47 (1753). See on this De Kock 1950: 184-86; Shell 1994: 312-14; and Van der Spuy 1993: 152-98.
