This drama took place in the house of the prominent burgher Abraham Cloppenburg.[^1] When he angrily ordered his slave Barkat van Timor to be whipped for not having set the supper table, Barkat attacked him, as well as another slave who got in his way, and barricaded himself in the attic. The subsequent siege lasted until the following morning, when Barkat was overcome by a *bandiet* working as one of the Company’s policemen.[^2]

Barkat’s response was a form of running *amok*,[^3] with indiscriminate attacks on everyone who got in his way, burghers, *caffers* and his fellow slaves, and his realisation that his actions were suicidal. It was a sudden and spontaneous reaction which took Cloppenburg by surprise. However, Cloppenburg was renowned for maltreating his slaves and admitted to the court that he had been angry. Barkat was executed by breaking on the wheel, but Cloppenburg was also reprimanded by the Council of Justice.[^4]

Barkat may have been a newcomer to the Cape since he did not yet understand Dutch and his testimony was given in Malay.[^5] It is a striking indication of the divisions within the forced migrants to the colony that he was overcome by a *bandiet* from Boegies, in the same region as his own place of origin, who would also have understood Malay.

We include here the interrogation of Barkat, and the testimonies of Cloppenburg and one of the *bandieten*, which enable a reconstruction of the episode from several perspectives.[^6]

[^1]: Abraham Cloppenburg arrived at the Cape as a free burgher in 1732 and held positions as a burgher councillor and on the church council, *Resolusies*, vol. 8: 385, n. 229. His brother, Ruardus Cloppenburg, became minister at the Cape in 1746 (DSAB IV: 86). The house was at the corner of Heere Street in Block B, and a room-by-room inventory was taken of it in 1743 (MOOC 8/6, document no. 67).

[^2]: For discussion of the *caffers*, see 1719 Jonas van Manado, n. 13.

[^3]: The phenomenon of “running *amok*” was well attested by comtemporaries as a dangerous response of Southeast Asian slaves. It usually involved unexpected attacks on all who had the misfortune to come in the path of the perpetrator, ending with his (*amok*-runners were always male) suicide, or attempted suicide. *Amok* had supernatural significance, often involving the use of the *kris* sword, which was believed to have special spiritual powers, and took place throughout insular Southeast Asia. For general analysis of *amok*, see Spores 1988 and, for a Cape example, Bradlow 1991. Other references or examples in this volume include 1717 Aaron van Bengalen; 1739 Cupido van Mallabaar; 1751 Januarij van Boegies; 1757 Baatjoe van Mandhaar; and 1775 Maart van Bencoule.

[^4]: Barkat admitted guilt but stated in defence that he had been mistreated by his owner. He was sentenced to be broken on the cross with the *coup de grâce*, the sentence recommended in the *eijsch*, CJ 349, f. 103. Nonetheless, after the sentence was carried out, the court decreed that although it had been deserved, reports had been received of Cloppenburg’s ‘al te driftige en brusque behandeling’ (rather too hot-tempered and brusque treatment) of all his slaves and that he should be admonished, CJ 26, ff. 15-6. A delegation was sent to his house to reprimand him, but two years later a similar incident happened when Galant van Mallebaar attacked Cloppenburg after he tried to flog him for staying away overnight (CJ 787, ff. 156-61).

[^5]: On the linguistic situation at the Cape, see 1763 Christina Strang and 1775 Moses van de Caab.

[^6]: Other available testimonies of witnesses are those of two of Cloppenburg’s slaves, Julij van Persie and Tornes van Balij, two burghers, Pieter Meijer and Abraham Leever, and a medical report on those who were wounded, CJ 349, ff. 99-120.
