---
title: ONTONG VAN BOEGIES AND ADONIS VAN DE CAAB
citation: CJ 794 Sententiën, 1777-1781, ff. 161-70.
---

Since Ontong van Boegies, slave of the farmer Johannes Nieuwout, 50 years old at a guess, currently their honours’ prisoner, has voluntarily confessed and, since from the other documents produced in the case, it has appeared clear as daylight to the honourable Council of Justice:

That on a Thursday morning about the middle of the month March of this year, or at the time of wine pressing, when the prisoner, who works on his owner’s farm, called De Salomons Valleij, situated in the Drakenstein district, was in the vineyard together with the burgher Pieter Engelbregt, who lives as *knecht* with the prisoner’s owner, as also his fellow slave Adonis, and asked if he too should cut grapes, he was answered by the aforesaid Engelbregt, who was then in the same row of vines about twenty paces from him, that he should rather carry the grapes to the cellar, as he, Engelbregt, would himself cut that row. The prisoner immediately cursed Engelbregt for a *moervreeter* and a child of a whore and asked if Engelbregt had anything else to order as well, at the same time adding: “Come, try and beat me!”

That at this, Engelbregt took up a piece of firewood and went to the prisoner and dealt him, because of his insolence, two or three blows with it. The prisoner’s owner, who had seen and heard from his house that the prisoner was raging against the aforementioned Engelbregt with swear words, therefore went to the vineyard and called from afar to Engelbregt: “Go on, hit him!”, upon which the aforementioned Engelbregt gave the prisoner some more blows and, noticing then that the prisoner made a small movement with his arm, in which hand he was holding a *boslemmer* knife, he at once gave the prisoner a blow on this arm with the result that the knife fell from the prisoner’s hand onto the ground, and moreover, when the prisoner tried to pick up the same again with his other hand, he gave him a second blow on his back, in such a way that the prisoner fell down to the ground. The prisoner’s owner, who had meanwhile come closer, was reprimanding the prisoner for his insolence and actions but was informed by the aforesaid Engelbregt that the prisoner had a knife in his hands.

That the prisoner then, while uttering a most slanderous curse against his owner, and saying continuously: “So, you want to get it?”, put the knife with its sharp side against his, the prisoner’s, throat; and since the prisoner’s owner had nothing in his hands, he consequently retreated slowly from the prisoner, thinking that the prisoner would kill himself. However, instead of this, the prisoner followed his aforesaid owner for some paces with a pole and a knife in his hands, yet shortly thereupon he stood still, turned around and returned again to the aforesaid Engelbregt and Adonis, who had retreated somewhat out of fear that the prisoner might attack them with the knife he was holding in his hands.

That meanwhile, while his owner was going to his house, the prisoner stood still and, out of anger, while constantly cursing, cut to pieces with his knife the branches of the vineyard surrounding him, while also at the same time repeatedly shouting: “Come here, now!” However, after the prisoner calmed down, he picked up his two baskets of grapes and took them to the cellar where, at his owner’s request, the prisoner’s knife was skilfully pulled from the pocket of his trousers while he was putting down the baskets and thrown away by the burgher Arij Visage, who just then was visiting his owner and had gone from the house to the cellar for this purpose. The prisoner asked the aforesaid Visage why he was throwing away his knife, to which Visage similarly replied with a question, viz. why the prisoner had threatened his owner with it, to which the prisoner, in his anger, said something, which, however, was not understood by Visage. The aforementioned Visage immediately took hold of the prisoner and brought him from the cellar to his owner in the house, where he was tied up and transported to Stellenbosch and thus delivered into the hands of justice.

But since doings like these can under no circumstances be left unpunished in a country where law and justice are upheld, but should, as an example and deterrent to other such scoundrels, be punished according to circumstances.

Thus it is, that the honourable Council of Justice, aforementioned, serving today, having carefully read and considered the written *crimineelen eijsh en conclusie* drawn up and delivered for and against the prisoner by the landdrost of Stellenbosch and Drakenstein, the honourable Olof Godlieb de Wet, in his official capacity, as well as having noted the prisoner’s voluntary confession and moreover everything which further served the case and could have moved their honours, practising justice in the name and on behalf of the high and mighty Lords States General of the United Netherlands, having judged the prisoner Ontong van Boegies, is sentencing him with this: to be taken to the usual place of justice, there to be handed over to the executioner, to be exposed with the rope around his neck under the gallows, thereafter to be tied to a stake, to be severely scourged with rods on his bare back, thereupon to be branded and then to be put into chains, in which to labour his whole life on the honourable Company’s public works on Robben Island, with sentencing to the costs and expenditures of justice; and denying the otherwise drawn up *eijsch* of the officer.[^1]

Thus done and sentenced in the Castle of Good Hope on 6 May 1779, as also pronounced and executed on the 15^th^ thereupon.[^2]

Let the sentence be done, \[signed\] Jm. van Plettenberg.

\[signed\] P. Hacker, A. van Schoor, L.C. Warneck, T.C. Rönnekamp, P.L. le Suëur, Gs. Hk. Cruijwagen, S. v. Echten, C.G. Maasdorp, G.H. Meijer.

In my presence, \[signed\] C.L. Neethling, secretary.

[^1]: The *eijsch* recommended death by hanging, CJ 413, vol. 1, f. 295.

[^2]: The case was first brought to the Council of Justice on 22 April 1779. Ontong said he did not deserve punishment, and the case was held over for further consideration until 6 May when the sentence above was passed, CJ 61, ff. 22-3. However, Adonis’s change of testimony, received on the same day, probably delayed the execution, which only took place on 15 May.