This case involved an argument between Ontong van Boegies and the *knecht* who was in charge of the vine harvesting. The owner supported the *knecht* fully, urging him to carry on beating Ontong. Ontong played for time by holding a knife to his own throat, but later threatened both his owner and the *knecht* with it.

The case is typical of conflicts in the court records over the authority of *knechten*.[^1] But it is also interesting for the actions of Ontong’s fellow slave, Adonis van de Caab. He attempted to use this episode to his own advantage, by changing his original evidence of what happened and by telling the authorities that Ontong was innocent and the fault lay with the *knecht* and their owner. Under cross-examination he confessed that he did this to spite his owner, and it was revealed that he had made plans to escape. Adonis was punished by the landdrost, rather than by the Council of Justice, but the case shows how slaves could try to use the legal system of the Company to their own advantage against their owners.[^2]

[^1]: For discussion of *knechten* and their role as slave overseers, see 1761 Johan Spring in ’t Veld, n. 1. In this case the *knecht* was a burgher and therefore a so-called *vrijknecht*, not the more usual *leenknecht* (on the difference, see De Wet 1981: 100-2; Shell 1994: 12-13).

[^2]: Other testimonies included were those of Johannes Nieuwout, Pieter Engelbrecht and Arij Visagie, and the interrogation of Ontong van Boegies, CJ 413, ff. 297-329.
