This case reveals the tensions and divisions that could arise between labourers on a farm – in this example between a Khoi and a slave.[^1] Andries had stolen some brandy and was whipped by his owner (as well as by the other slaves, presumably on his owner’s orders). He suspected Pieter, a Khoi worker on the farm, who mocked him after his whipping, of having informed on him, and tried to kill him. He then ran away and also attempted to set fire to his master’s wine cellar. Andries claimed that he sought death as a punishment in preference to staying in this world where he had endured so much punishment. The court obliged him in a particularly painful way.[^2]

[^1]: Khoi labourers worked on many Cape settler farms by the eighteenth century (Elphick & Malherbe 1989: 28-35, Biewenga 1999: 105-8), although the exclusion of the Khoi from the *opgaaf* registers until the nineteenth century means that cases such as this provide the only evidence of their role as farm labourers in the VOC period. By 1806, half of the farmers of the Stellenbosch and Drakenstein districts used both Khoi and slave labourers, Worden 1985: 34-5. For discussion of the relations between proletarianised Khoi farm workers and slaves, see Ross 1983: 38-53 and Worden 1985: 90, 141-42. For other cases involving Khoi and slave workers, see 1735 Varken, Toontje and Ruijter; 1742 Fortuijn van Bengalen; 1745 Cupido van Bengalen; 1752 April van de Caab; 1761 Johann Spring in ’t Veld; and 1763 Christina Strang.

[^2]: The interrogation of Andries van Ceijlon is preserved in CJ 328, ff. 7-16.
