# MOSES VAN DE CAAB

*As the majority of slaves during the eighteenth century were imported, it meant that there were speakers of a wide range of languages at the Cape. Since many came from South and Southeast Asia, where Creole Portuguese and Malay were well entrenched as contact languages,[^1] these languages were widely used at the Cape by the second half of the century, especially (but not exclusively) amongst slaves.[^2] Even so, the great variety of circumstances and individuals at the Cape could easily lead to misunderstandings, as illustrated in this case where an argument between two slaves on a Stellenbosch farm was exacerbated by the problems they had understanding each other’s language: Moses van de Caab was born in the colony, while Januarij had been imported from India and spoke no Dutch and only a little Portuguese, presumably the only languages Moses could speak.[^3] The wide variety of regions from which slaves were brought to the Cape was also one factor which inhibited the development of a distinctive slave culture rooted in the area of origin.[^4]*

*Januarij subsequently died of his wound, and the case was sent to the Council of Justice, where Moses van de Caab was charged with ‘wrathfully throwing a knife’ and causing Januarij’s death. He was sentenced to 25 years on the public works at Robben Island.[^5]*

[^1]: For the use of Creole Portuguese and Malay as contact languages in these regions, see Groeneboer 1993: 16-28, 45-7, 92-3.

[^2]: Slaves spoke their own mother tongues to other fellow speakers where they had contact with them (such as Bugis, which seems to have been quite widespread in the second half of the eighteenth century, Davids 1994: 46-7), but since slaves from a wide variety of linguistic backgrounds were usually together on a farm or in a household, they often had to resort to a lingua franca. The language used changed over time in accordance with variations in the regions from which slaves were imported. Thus it seems unlikely that Creole Portuguese was used as a general contact language at the Cape before about 1700, and Malay probably only from some decades later (Groenewald 2002: 92-3 and 213-16). On Creole Portuguese and Malay at the Cape, see Den Besten 1997: 330-43 and 2000: 953-59; Franken 1953: 41-79; and Ponelis 1993: 14-17. For knowledge of these contact languages (or lack of it) amongst the burgher population, see the discussion in 1763 Christina Strang, n. 12.

[^3]: Januarij is described as ‘van Bengalen’ in the surgeon’s report, CJ 409, vol. 4, f. 242 \[modern pagination\]. Moses may well have understood some Creole Portuguese or Malay, but not the indigenous Asian language spoken by Januarij.

[^4]: This is not to say that slaves did not possess any cultural identity, but rather that it was formed at the Cape with an admixture of local and Indian Ocean roots. On language and slave culture at the Cape, see Ross 1983: 14-15 and Worden 1985: 94-5.

[^5]: ‘grammoedige werping met een mes naar desselfs meede slaaf Januarij, mitsgaders daardoor veroorsaakte quetsing en opgevolgde neederslag’ (wrathfully throwing a knife at his fellow slave Januarij, and also the wounding caused by it and the resulting collapse). Moses claimed that it was an accident, CJ 409, f. 247 \[modern pagination\]. The full sentence was a public whipping and 25 years on Robben Island, with costs, CJ 57, ff. 39-40. The *eijsch* had recommended a life sentence on Robben Island, which probably came to much the same thing, CJ 409, f. 225 \[modern pagination\]. In addition to the testimony of October given here, the full documentation for the case includes the *sententie* (CJ 793, ff. 240-48)*,* the *eijsch* and the testimonies of Slammat van Boegies, Solomon van de Caab, Fortuijn van Bengalen, the surgeon’s report on the body of Januarij van Bengalen, as well as the interrogation of Moses, CJ 409, vol. 4, ff. 215-51 \[modern pagination\].