---
title: MICHIEL DANIEL LOURICH
citation: CJ 345 Criminele Process Stukken, 1740, ff. 581-586 & 594.
---

Today, 11 October 1740, there appears before me, Daniel Godfried Carnspek, secretary of the honourable Council of Justice of the Castle of Good Hope, in the presence of the witnesses named below, the soldier Jan Christoffel Fabricius, of competent age, who, on the requisition of the honourable independent fiscal, *Meester* Daniel van den Henghel, declares it to be the whole truth:

That at seven o’clock in the morning of Saturday, the 8^th^ of this current month October, the deponent saw sitting in the kitchen of the burgher Michiel Daniel Lorich \[*sic*\], with whom he was lodging at this time, the wife of said Lorich, for which reason, he asked her: “*Juffrouw*, why are you sitting here so early?”, to which she answered: “Lorich had locked the door of the room”. The deponent then went into his bedroom where he dressed himself, during which time the said burgher Lorich came from his room, whereupon the said wife of Lorich asked her husband, when they were both in the *voorhuijs*,[^1] if she might go out, to which the same answered her: “No, you will stay at home”, which is when she stood up from the chair on which she had sat down just a moment before, saying: “I am going out”. Upon this, the aforementioned Lorich gave his wife a kick with his foot on her behind, saying suddenly: “Get out of the house with your bastard child, you cow!”, whereafter this woman indeed left the house with her child on the arm.

That the deponent also went out, returning home in the evening at about six o’clock and found them sitting with abovementioned Lorich in the room, the boatswain of the ship’s yard \[at the Cape\], Laurens Staff,[^2] who – as the deponent could hear – was doing his utmost to persuade Lorich, who was uttering several swearing words, to take back again into his house his aforementioned wife. Hearing this, the deponent went to the stoep where he walked up and down, and shortly hereafter the said boatswain, Laurens Staff, also came through the door and, after saying goodbye, went away. Whereupon the said Lorich came to the deponent, asking him if he would like to drink a glass of wine with him, to which the deponent answered yes; and together went into the room where each drank a glass of wine. That the deponent, with the aforementioned Lorich, first sat talking in the said room and then walked up and down in the house until after ten o’clock, during which time the said Lorich was continually swearing and cursing his wife; after which the deponent said to Lorich that, since it was already after ten, he would go to bed, whereupon the said Lorich left him and the deponent lay himself down to rest in the large room on the righthand side. However, having slept for only a short while, a certain *meijd* belonging to Lorich, without him knowing her name, came into the room to the deponent and fell onto his body, crying: “Oh, *baas*, help! Oh, *baas*, help!”, upon which, shortly thereafter, a certain slave *jongen* named Januarij also came into the room and took the aforementioned *meijd* from it. A short while thereafter, though, this woman slave came into the said room for the second time, crying: “Oh, *baas*, help! *Baas*, help!”, at which the deponent got up and went to the kitchen, where he saw that aforementioned Lorich standing with the said Januarij, to whom he was saying: “Januarij, go on, hit!”, and as the same wanted to hit the *meijd*, the deponent grabbed the *sjambok* from the hand of this *jongen* and threw it into the large room, saying at once to Lorich: “You ought to be ashamed of yourself, what sort of life is this in this house, what would the neighbours think?”, to which the said Lorich answered: “That is none of your business, she is my slave, the thievish whore has earned it”, after which the deponent again went into his room, where he dressed himself, left the house and went to the house of the burgher Jochem Jurriens, at which point it had been about 12 o’clock at night.

There being nothing else to declare, the deponent asserts to be convinced of the accuracy of his statement as in the text, being willing to subsequently confirm all of the above with solemn oaths, if so required.

Thus recorded at the office of the secretary of justice at the Castle of Good Hope in the presence of the clerks, Adriaan van Schoor and Otto Camphuijsen, as witnesses, who have properly signed the original of this, together with the deponent and me, the secretary.

Verification

There appears before us, the undersigned delegates from the honourable Council of Justice of this government, the soldier Jan Christoffel Fabricius, who, after this, his given deposition, had been read out word by word, clearly and plainly, declares to fully persist by it, therefore not desiring that anything more be added to or taken from it, and consequently said, in the presence of the burgher Michiel Daniel Lourich, as confirmation of the truth, these solemn words: “Truly so, help me, Almighty God”.

Thus verified and confirmed at the Cape of Good Hope on 18 November 1740, before the honourables Am. Decker and Jacob de Hennion, members from the honourable Council of Justice, aforementioned, who have properly signed the original of this, together with the deponent and me, the first sworn clerk.

Which I declare, \[signed\] P.J. Slotsboo, first sworn clerk.

**CJ 345** Criminele Process Stukken, 1740, ff. 584-86v.

Today, 11 October 1740, there appears before me, Daniel Godfried Carnspek, secretary of the honourable Council of Justice of this government, in the presence of the witnesses named below, Januarij van Mallabaar, slave of the burgher Michiel Daniel Lourick, of competent age, who, on the requisition of the honourable independent fiscal, *Meester* Daniel van den Henghel, declares it to be true:

That at about nine o’clock in the morning of Saturday the 8^th^ of this current month October, the deponent went out to collect some firewood, as he had been ordered; seeing at that time that his mistress was also leaving the house with her child on the arm, going with the same \[child\] to the boatswain Lourens Staff. The deponent returned to the house in the afternoon at about 12 o’clock with the firewood he had collected, without finding his mistress then at home, and at about one o’clock, after having eaten, he, on the order of his *baas*, went out for the second time to collect firewood, with which he returned home at about six o’clock that evening.

That his *baas* then instructed the deponent to go and fetch some water and to rinse out some bottles into which a casket of beer was to be tapped, which he also did, without, though, rinsing the said bottles, after which his *baas* ordered him to remain in the *voorhuijs* and to attend to \[i.e. serve\] people when they came in. At this time his *baas* was with the soldier Jan Christoffel Fabricius in the large room on the right-hand side, who then called the deponent into the room to light a pipe of tobacco and to pour a glass of wine for him and the said Fabricius. After the deponent had done this, he was again ordered by his *baas* to attend in the *voorhuijs*, after which he was called two or three times more by his *baas*, each time to light a pipe of tobacco and pour a glass of wine, and moreover ordered to remain in the *voorhuijs*.

That when the said Fabricius had already gone to the large room to sleep, the deponent’s *baas* left the aforesaid room and went into the kitchen where he searched for the *meijd* Diana. Yet, not finding the same there, he searched in the back of the yard and everywhere for her, until he at last found the said *meijd* in (by your leave) the privy, from where the deponent’s *baas* dragged the said slave Diana by the hair and then brought her into the kitchen, giving the deponent a *sjambok* in the hand and instructed him to beat the said *meijd* Diana with it, which he did in the presence of his *baas*, who continually shouted: “Go on, hit, or I’ll hit you”.

That when the deponent had been beating the said Diana with the *sjambok* for about the length of time it takes to smoke a pipe of tobacco, and was still busy beating her, she suddenly ran very quickly from the kitchen into the large room where the said Fabricius was lying asleep and called for help, saying to the same, as the deponent – who, with his *baas*, had followed the said *meijd* Diana on the heels – heard: “Help, *baas*; help, *baas*”, to which Fabricius said: “*Meijd*, get off my body”. His *baas* ordered the deponent to take the said Diana to the kitchen again and to continue beating her, which he also did, and which lasted for about half of a quarter of an hour, when the same *meijd* Diana yet again ran to the large room and requested help from Fabricius, who then came into the kitchen where the said Diana already found herself again, grabbed the *sjambok* from the deponent’s hand and said to his *baas*: “What sort of life is it in this house, what would the neighbours think of it?”, to which the deponent’s *baas* answered: “These are matters which don’t concern you”, and then ordered the deponent to find the *sjambok* again, which he did, and handed it to his *baas*, which is when Fabricius said to Laurich \[*sic*\]: “I don’t wish to stay any longer in a house such as this” and went out of the house, it then being 12 o’clock at night then.

That thereupon his *baas* went out to the back yard, found a rope there and returned with the same to the kitchen, while the deponent, remained standing by the door in the *voorhuijs*, from where he saw that his said *baas* pulled the clothes from the body of the aforementioned *meijd* Diana and, when the same was totally naked, tied her hands and feet together with the rope and then beat her with the *sjambok* on her naked body, which lasted almost a whole hour. The deponent saw that his said *baas*, as soon as he had stopped beating, untied her, but, while she was still lying on the ground, gave her a kick or two with his foot on which was a slipper, saying: “Damn you, whore”, to which Diana said: “*Baas*, I am already half dead”, to which his said *baas* answered again: “I shall answer for what may come of it”; thereafter going to bed, while the deponent likewise went to sleep in the *voorhuijs*.

That at about six o’clock on Sunday morning the deponent’s *baas* called him into his room and ordered him to take the bedding of the said Diana up to the attic and to tell her that she too should go up to the attic, which he also did. The said *meijd* Diana then climbed the stairs to the top without saying a word, and at about nine o’clock the deponent heard the brother of his mistress, named Christiaan, say to his *baas*, who was then still lying on the bed in his room: “Brother, the *meijd* Diana is already dead”, whereupon the deponent’s *baas* got up, dressed himself and then went out of the house.

There being nothing else to declare, the deponent asserts to be convinced of the accuracy of his statement as in the text, while offering to subsequently confirm this, his deposition, at any time, if so required.

Thus recorded at the office of the secretary of justice at the Castle of Good Hope, in the presence of the clerks Hendrik Emanuel Blanckenberg and Otto Camphuijsen, as witnesses, who have properly signed the original of this, together with the deponent and me, the secretary.

Verification

There appears before us, the undersigned delegates from the honourable Council of Justice of this government, the slave Januarij van Mallabaar, who, after this, his given deposition, had been read out word by word, clearly and plainly, declares to fully persist by it, therefore not desiring that anything be added to or taken from it, declaring, in the presence of his said owner, all of the above to contain the whole truth.

Thus verified at the Cape of Good Hope on 18 November 1740 before the honourables A. Decker and Jacob de Hennion, members from the aforementioned honourable Council of Justice, who have properly signed the original of this, together with the deponent and me, the first clerk.

Which I declare, \[signed\] P.J. Slotsboo, first sworn clerk.

**CJ 345** Criminele Process Stukken, 1740, ff. 594r-v.

On the requisition of the honourable independent fiscal, *Meester* Daniel van den Henghel, we, the first and second chief surgeons of the honourable Company’s hospital, declare to have opened the head and inspected, in the presence of the delegates from the honourable Council of Justice of this government, the honourables Philip Rudolph de Savoij and Jacobus d’Hennion, a woman slave named Diana van Bengalen, belonging to the burgher Daniel Lorich, and to have found:

A wound above the left eye, another small one on top of the head, not going further than partly through the muscles and being caused by an external sharp instrument, and also wounds on numerous places over the whole body, with bruises on the skin, to outward appearances caused by *sjambok* lashes, but which are not mortal wounds; also being unable to determine if death was caused by them, or rather by suddenly drinking \[something\] cold on a heated and wholly agitated body,[^3] or because of the cold, since the corpse was found totally naked on the first inspection.

As sign of the truth we have undersigned this with our customary signatures.

Cape of Good Hope, 10 October 1740,

\[signed\] Js. van Schoor, B. de St. Jean.

[^1]: The *voorhuijs* was the first room entered from the street or stoep, where visitors were received and where Januarij slept. Fabricius slept in the large room to the right, probably leading off the *voorhuijs*, and Lourich slept in another room, either to the left of the *voorhuijs* or behind the large room. We are grateful to Antonia Malan for this information.

[^2]: Laurens Staff of Gottenborg had arrived at the Cape in 1729 and married the sister of Lourich’s wife on the same day as their own marriage in 1736 (Heese & Lombard 1986-2004, vol. 1: 278). He was later sent sent to Robben Island ‘in consequence of his insanity’ (Leibbrandt 1905: 383) and appears on the Company pay registers until 1781 (VOC 12792, ff. 77, 333-34, 368-69, 371 and 373).

[^3]: Contemporaries believed that beatings inflamed the body and that drinking water afterwards could cause collapse and death (Sparrman 1977, vol. II: 256-57; Schoeman 2004: 206). See 1729 Jan Botma for another instance of this.
