Here Cape Town slaves plan to steal flour from one of their owners and to sell it to an exiled Chinese person in the town. They are caught red-handed by the nightwatchmen and apprehended. The case gives a glimpse of the Chinese* bandieten *(convicts) exiled to the Cape from Batavia, some of whom, such as Limoeijko, had served their sentences and were ‘free Chinese’. The authorities suspected the Chinese community in Cape Town of being actively involved in smuggling and the handling of stolen goods.[^1] Certainly these slaves knew where to bring their flour, and Limoeijko’s claims of innocence were not believed and he was punished along with the slaves.[^2]

[^1]: Certainly they were very active in the retail trade which, given Company regulations to restrict private trading, meant that their activities constantly bordered on the illegal and they frequently appeared in the criminal court records. For discussion of this and other cases involving Chinese smugglers, see Alexander 2003 and, on the Chinese community in general in Cape Town, Armstrong 1997. The number of Chinese *bandieten* sent to the Cape increased in the 1740s as labour was required to build the projected breakwater at Mouille Point. Alexander speculates that Limoeijko may have been more impoverished than some of his predecessors, as shown by his willingness to deal in stolen flour.

[^2]: Salaoos was displayed standing under the gallows with a rope around his neck, and was then, with the other three, whipped and branded. The three slaves were sent back to their owners, while Limoeijko was sentenced to labour in chains on the Company’s public works for life, CJ 31, ff. 99-102. This was more lenient than the death sentence for Salaoos, the ten years in chains for December and Baatjoe and the life imprisonment in the Company battery for Limoeijko that were recommended in the *eijsch.* The *eijsch* and the testimonies of the accused and the burgher *ratelwacht* are in CJ 357, ff. 415-33.