---
title: JEPHTA VAN BATAVIA
citation: CJ 785 Sententiën, 1726-1735, ff. 178-82.
---

As Jephta van Batavia, bondsman of the burgher Johannes Heufke, 30 years old, currently their honours’ prisoner, has voluntary confessed without any torture or coercion of bonds, of irons, or the least threat of suchlike, and since it also appeared evident to the honourable Council of Justice of this government:

That on Tuesday morning, which was the 30^th^ of the previous month August, the prisoner was sent by his owner, Johannes Heufke, to his farm situated at Rondebosch, in order to stay at that place. He did go there in the morning, but instead of obeying the command of his *baas* by staying there, he, on the contrary, had returned to the Cape already by nine o’clock that morning; remaining here and wandering around until seven o’clock at night, at which time the prisoner went into his aforementioned master’s house, situated behind the Company’s hospital, where he then got himself drunk in the wine cellar. After this the prisoner called to the door a certain fellow slave, by the name of Maria van Ceijlon, who also lives at that house and with whom the prisoner has had a relationship for some time; which is also the reason why she came to him and remained standing in the door; at which point he, Jephta van Batavia, said to the slave Maria: “Why are you hurting me?”, meaning with this that she was having a relationship or has had carnal knowledge with someone other than him.

That the prisoner thereupon went into the house with the aforesaid slave Maria, and the two of them sat down upon the stairs where he held her until she, having extricated herself, went away from him and into the pantry inside the kitchen, to which the prisoner followed her and immediately, in a murderous manner, gave her a stab in the left side of her chest with the knife that he ordinarily carries with him and which he had sharpened just before. However, the prisoner was not satisfied with this, but once again gave the aforementioned slave Maria, as she fled into the kitchen, a stab on her right breast, as a result of which she fell down onto the ground.

That she, Maria van Ceijlon, thereupon got up and fled to the front, where the burgher Johanna Lens and the mason Baarend Smit said to him, the prisoner: “Jephta, what are you doing, do you realise that you have wounded Maria, and do you know what the consequences will be?” to which the prisoner answered in a rage: “*Masque raadbraaken*, [^1] I shall kill her, I shall devour her heart, I want my death”.

All of which are atrocious deeds and unheard-of cruelty which, in a country where justice is administered well, cannot be tolerated but, on the contrary, must be punished most rigorously, in order to check the evil and to serve as an example to other villains.

Wherefore it is thus, that the honourable Council of Justice of this government, serving today, having seen and heard the written *crimineelen eijsch* drawn up and delivered for and against the prisoner by the honourable independent fiscal Adriaan van Kervel in his official capacity, and moreover, having noted with carefully considered counsel the former’s voluntary confession, properly verified, and everything further that should be noted in this \[case\], practising justice in the name and on behalf of the high and mighty Lords States General of the free United Netherlands and, having judged the prisoner, Jephta van Batavia, their honours are sentencing him with this: to be taken to the place where criminal sentences are usually executed here, and there being handed over to the executioner, firstly to be exposed with a rope around his neck under the gallows, thereafter to be tied to a stake with the murder weapon, or the knife with which he had committed the deed, above his head, and to be severely scourged on the bare back, thereafter to be branded, whereafter to labour in chains, without payment, on the public works for the period of ten years, with sentencing to the costs and expenditure of justice.[^2]

Thus done and sentenced in the Castle of Good Hope on 13 October 1729.

Moreover pronounced and executed on the 15^th^ thereupon.

\[signed\] J.T. Rhenius, Ns. Heijning, H. Swellengrebel, Cl. Brand, Js. Möller, R. Tulbagh, Hendk. Oostwald Eksteen, J. Blanckenberg, G. la Febre.

In my presence, \[signed\] Js. de Grandpreez, secretary.

[^1]: In the phrase ‘masque raadbraaken’, the last word is the Dutch verb ‘to be broken upon the wheel’, while the first is the Creole Portuguese *maski* meaning ‘never mind, although, even (so), in spite of’ (from Portuguese *mas que*). Thus this phrase literally means: ‘never mind \[being\] broken on the wheel’. The word *maski* had been in use at the Cape from the late seventeenth century (Franken 1953: 48, 204), seemingly by both slaves and Khoikhoi as a modal element in their varieties of Dutch and eventually became part of incipient Afrikaans, being quite common in nineteenth-century texts. Curiously, with the linguistic engineering that resulted in modern standard Afrikaans, it disappeared from the language, being only retained in the archaic *almaskie*, ‘nevertheless’ (Roberge 2002: 398-404).

[^2]: This was more lenient than the death sentence by hanging which the fiscal recommended in the *eijsch*, CJ 333, f. 307. The lesser sentence was confirmed, CJ 11, ff. 56-7, but Heufke was unwilling to pay the costs and instead offered to make Jephta over to the VOC, which the Council of Policy happily accepted since Jephta was in such a ‘kloeke, jonge en gesonde gesteltheijd’ (fine, young and healthy condition), *Resolusies*, vol. 8: 60-1. Such a statement contradicts the fiscal’s claim that Jephta was an atrocious villain. Doubtless his suitability to undertake heavy labour overrode any qualms the Company might have had in taking him into their control. It also points to the fact that the phrase ‘with the costs’ was no empty one, but a real factor (see De Kock 1950: 167). From 1730 onwards, Jephta appears on the *Bandieten rollen* of prisoners on Robben Island with this annotation next to his name: ‘geweesen slaaf van den burger Johannes Heufke, en door hem voor de costen aan den E. Comp. geschonken, voor hoe lang: 10 jaar, gesententieerd: 13.10.1729’ (former slave of the burgher Johannes Heufke and donated by him to the honourable Company for the costs, for how long: 10 years, sentenced: 13.10.1729), CJ 3188, ff. 46-7 et seq.