---
title: CUPIDO VAN MALLABAAR
citation: CJ 786 Sententiën, 1736-1743, ff. 263-70.
---

Since Cupido van Mallabaar, slave of the burgher Jan van Straeten, 28 years old at a guess, currently their honours’ prisoner, has voluntarily confessed without torture or force of bonds, of irons, or even the least threat of suchlike, and since it has appeared as clear as daylight to the honourable Council of Justice of this government:

That on a certain day during the recently passed month of March, without being able to name the precise date, the prisoner, after he had already gone in and out of his master’s house, situated in Draakensteijn, three or four times, finally entered the house again and went to a room, from which he took a musket and also a box with gunpowder. When the prisoner’s mistress, who was alone at home with her child, saw this, she asked him why he took the musket and what he wanted to shoot with it, and when the prisoner replied to this: “I do not want to shoot you, but myself”, his mistress said: “In God’s name, put it down”, while the prisoner replied: “You just pick up your child”. That the prisoner’s mistress then picked up her child and went with it to the *voorhuijs*. The prisoner put down the musket, followed them and, when he got to the *voorhuijs*, took his knife from his pocket, saying: “What do you want now, that I should murder you, or myself?”, and then put the back of the knife against his throat, asking if his said mistress wanted to see him slitting his throat; upon which his mistress earnestly enquired why he wanted to do this, and whether something was wrong with him, to which the prisoner gave as answer: “So much”. And, after the prisoner took off his jacket and shirt and threw them down on the ground, he said, pointing to his leather trousers: “I am not used to wearing trousers like these, I have already worked two or three years here, and I do not see the *baas* buying more *jongens* or *nonje* buying a *meijd* for me,[^1] *baas* and *nonje* may talk and laugh very well”. The prisoner at this time also told his said mistress that he once went into the room while her husband was lying asleep with the intention to kill him but, looking at him, the prisoner repented because he took pity on his mistress and her child. After this, the prisoner’s mistress went outside through the door, with the prisoner following her, and who then showed her five bullets which he took from his pocket, saying: “These bullets I have made for myself”.

That after this, when the prisoner again went to the room to collect the musket, his mistress meanwhile sought to take flight with her child, but that the prisoner noticed this and immediately followed her, with an unsheathed knife in his hand, and ordered her to return to the house, saying that he knew full well what her intention was. Whereupon the prisoner’s mistress then went to the house, where the prisoner ordered her to go into the kitchen, and when she had done this, the prisoner stabbed at her at least twice with his unsheathed knife, which stabs the prisoner’s mistress tried to prevent, the first time with her right and the second time with her left hand, as a result of which she got injured on both her hands. After this, the prisoner put the knife in his pocket, took his mistress by her hair and dragged her to the room, saying: “Stay there with your child and look after it”, upon which the prisoner again went from the room into the *voorhuijs* where he picked up the musket which was then standing there. When his said mistress noticed this, she came into the *voorhuijs* with a broom handle and said to the prisoner: “If you do not leave the musket, I will hit you with the broom handle”, to which he answered: “Come on, hit me”, but that she came to her senses, went from him and picked up her child. The prisoner then put the butt-end of the musket against the wall and its muzzle against his chest, but, without firing it, he put it down again, saying: “You are after all wounded, it would be better if I simply kill you, as you will only go and tell the *baas*”; to which the prisoner’s mistress replied that she would not tell this, but rather that she had cut herself on her hands when she tried to slice bread, to which the prisoner answered: “You will do that”. The prisoner’s mistress finally talked him round to go to the surgeon Schabort to fetch a plaster and some brandy for her wounds which were bleeding strongly. To this end, she gave him an empty bottle to take with him, with which bottle he went to a dry rivulet not far from the house, and when he returned from there, the prisoner brought with him half a bottle of brandy, of which he poured some onto the wounds of his mistress. According to what the prisoner says, he had obtained this brandy from a certain *jongen*, named Januarij, belonging to the burgher David Villier.

That after he had done this, the prisoner also said to his mistress: “It would be better if I murder you, your husband and your child, and that I flay you open like flecked fish, and then do me as well”, after which he went outside to pass water, which opportunity his mistress used to take flight with her child, going to the farm of the farmer David Villier. When she was some way from the house, she saw the prisoner looking for her amongst the bushes outside the house and, shortly thereafter, also heard to the side of her house a shot going off and, some time thereafter, much smoke and fume going up from the house, all of which she made known on her arrival at the farm of the said Villier, who immediately set out there.

That when the prisoner returned to the house and found his mistress missing, he went outside to search for her amongst the bushes, but when he could not find her, he again went to the house and into the room in order, according to what he says, to shoot himself, but through which the bedding caught fire, which he wanted to drag out but, because of his drunkenness, was unable to do so. The prisoner went outside the house and, when he saw some of the neighbours coming, went to the dry rivulet by the house and tried to cut his throat there, but was taken prisoner while busy doing this by the said neighbours, and was thus delivered into the hands of justice.

And since such unprecedented atrocities cannot be punished severely enough in a country where law and justice are practised.

So it is, that the honourable Council of Justice of this government, serving today, having seen and read with attention the written *crimineelen eijsch ende conclusie* drawn up for and delivered for and against the prisoner by the landdrost, *Sieur* Pieter Lourensz, in his official capacity, besides having noted the prisoner’s voluntary, verified confession and everything else which further served the case, practising justice in the name and on behalf of the high and mighty Lords States General of the free United Netherlands and, having judged the prisoner Cupido van Mallabaar, their honours are sentencing him with this: to be taken to the place where criminal sentences are usually executed here, there to be handed over to the executioner and to be tied onto a cross, to be broken alive from the bottom up, without the *coup de grâce*, to remain lying thus on the cross until he has given up the ghost, thereafter the dead body to be dragged to the outer place of execution, to be placed upon a wheel and to remain lying on this until being consumed by the air and the birds of heaven; the Council further sentences the prisoner to the costs and expenditure of justice.

Thus done and sentenced in the Castle of Good Hope on 28 May 1739, as well as pronounced and executed on the 30^th^ of this month.[^2]

Let the execution be done, \[signed\] H. Swellengrebel.

\[signed\] R. Tulbagh, D. v.d. Henghel, Ns. Heijning, Cl. Brand, Js. Möller, Mnus. Bergh, Corns. Eelders, P.R. de Savoije, Js. de Grandpreez, Am. Decker, H.J. Prehn, Jan Hendrik Hop, G. la Febre.

In my presence, \[signed\] D.G. Carnspek, secretary.

[^1]: According to Haafner, who lived at the Cape between 1767 and 1770, it was very common in the Dutch colonies ‘dat men aan de huisslaven, ten einde hun het bezoeken van vreemde slavinnen te beletten en meer aan het huis van hunnen meester te verbinden, eene slavin uit het huis toevoegt, die met elkander zamenwonen en ook wederzijds vrij getrouw zijn, hetgene men dan zijne slaven uittrouwen noemt’ (that, in order to prevent other female slaves from visiting, and to attach their own slaves more to the house of their masters, one would give a female slave from the household to house slaves, who would live together, and who would also be fairly faithful to each other; which system is called marrying out one’s slaves) (Haafner 1992: 74). Not buying a female slave for Cupido obviously did not ‘attach’ him to the house of his owner.

[^2]: Cupido’s admission of guilt and the sentence were recorded in the *regtsrollen*, CJ 21, ff. 44-6. This was one of the most severe and gruesome sentences that could be passed by the Council of Justice.
