---
title: CERES VAN MADAGASCAR & APRIL VAN CEIJLON
citation: CJ 795 Sententiën, 1782-1789, ff. 286-96.
---

As Ceres van Madagascar, 30 years old at a guess, and April van Ceijlon, 40 years old at a guess, both slaves of the burgher Olthman Ahlers, currently their honours’ prisoners, have voluntarily confessed and further, since it appeared evident to the honourable Council of Justice of this government:

That for four years the first prisoner Ceres has been having a relationship on his owner’s farm, situated in the Tijgerbergen, with the slave woman Louisa, who also belongs to his said owner, \[and that\] the second prisoner April, on the 18^th^ of the past month February, when they were working together in the cellar, said to the first prisoner: “Are you too a fellow who goes with the *meijd* Louisa, who also goes with other *jongens*?” The first prisoner answered to this: “Why are you tormenting me? I have never seen that!”, without there being at that time any further discussion about this between the first and second prisoners.

That, nonetheless, when they had finished their work in the cellar in the evening, the time being already 8 o’clock, the first prisoner, feeling jealous because of what he had been told, went through the back door into the kitchen, where the second prisoner was already present, and the aforesaid woman slave Louisa was busy preparing tea for her owner’s children, and coming into the kitchen, the first prisoner went directly and with laughter to the said Louisa, without saying a word either to the *meijd* or to the other slaves present in the kitchen, taking her by hand, and took her thus with him from the kitchen through the back door to the outside and, in going out said to the second prisoner: “Come on, come out now, and prove what you have said”; so the second prisoner also went outside.

That the first prisoner, as soon as he was outside the kitchen with the said Louisa and April, placed the aforementioned Louisa in front of him and asked her: “What am I hearing! Do you also go with other *jongens*?”, upon which she asked: “Who says that?”, to which the first prisoner answered: “April says that!”, when the aforementioned Louisa asked: “Is that true?”, to which the first prisoner continued: “Yes, that is true!”, while adding: “April is standing there, ask him yourself!”, whereupon Louisa asked the second prisoner about it, but that *jongen* did not answer anything.

That the first prisoner, after first hitting the said Louisa, gave her a stab with a knife in her left breast, which, going through the second rib, penetrated through the lung, with damage to her blood vessels, and in this way was completely fatal; upon which the prisoner immediately saved himself by fleeing.

That as the aforesaid Louisa did not return, her mother, the slave Sanna, who was present in the kitchen, became suspicious and therefore went to go and find her, which is when she found her daughter Louisa between the house and the chicken coop, lying bending forward as if dead, which proved to be the case when she was picked up on the order of their owner, whom they had called for.

That the second prisoner remained absent that night, yet the following morning again came to work in the cellar, when he claimed that he had slept that night in the vineyard because he was somewhat drunk. However, after he went to the kitchen at 8 o’clock in the morning to get his bread and saw the soulless body of the woman slave Louisa lying there, he tried to flee, but was caught by the *volk* and, having been tied up, was transported to the Cape. As also the first prisoner who, some days thereafter, was discovered at De Grendel and taken prisoner, and brought to the Cape as well; with both of them thus given over into the hands of justice.

But since such deliberate murder, malicious accusations and incitement to murder can under no circumstances be tolerated in a country where justice is properly administered, but must, as circumstances merit, be punished as an example to other such murderous and malevolent rogues.

Thus it is, that the honourable Council of Justice, having read and deliberated the written *crimineelen eijsch ende conclusie* drawn up and delivered for and against both prisoners by the interim fiscal here, *Sieur* Gabriel Exter, by reason of his office, as well as having noted everything serving the case and which could have moved their honours, practising justice in the name and on behalf of the high and mighty Lords States General of the United Netherlands, and having judged both the prisoners, Ceres van Madagascar and April van Ceijlon, is sentencing them with this: to be taken to the place where criminal sentences are usually executed here, there to be handed over to the executioner, the first prisoner, Ceres, to be bound to a cross, to be dismembered from the bottom up, with the *coup de grâce*, afterwards his dead body to be dragged to the outer place of execution, there to be laid upon a wheel, and to remain thus as prey to the air and the birds of heaven; further the second prisoner, April van Ceijlon, to be exposed with a rope around the neck under the gallows, then to be tied to a stake, severely scourged on the bare back with rods, thereafter to be riveted in chains and to labour in them for a period of five successive years without wages on the public works on Robben Island, and after the termination of this time, to be returned to his master; with sentencing both of the prisoners to the costs and expenditure of justice.[^1]

Thus done and sentenced at the Cape of Good Hope on 23 March 1786, as well as pronounced in the Castle of Good Hope on the 1^st^ of the following month April and executed on the same day.

Let the sentence be done, \[signed\] C.J. van de Graaff.

\[signed\] P. Hacker, Gs. Hk. Cruijwagen, Johs. Smuts, S. v. Echten, As. van Sittert, J.M. Horak, J.M. Bletterman, W.F. v. Reede van Oudtshoorn, C.G. Maasdorp, G.H. Meijer, O.G. de Wet.

In my presence, \[signed\] C. van Aersen, secretary.

[^1]: This sentence was recorded in the *regtsrollen*, CJ 68, ff. 18-19. It differed somewhat from that recommended in the *eijsch*, which did not propose the *coup de grâce* for Ceres van Madagascar and proposed that April van Ceijlon be kept in chains for two years but returned to his master, CJ 424, ff. 7-8. Further documentation for this case consists of the interrogations of Ceres van Madagasacar and April van Ceijlon, the testimonies of Stoffel van de Caab and Sanna van Mallebaar (Louisa’s mother) and the surgeon’s report on the body of Louisa, CJ 424, ff. 9-31.