Januarij van Tutocorijn[^1] was maltreated by his owner, the widow Van der Spuij, for failing to bring home sufficient koeli geld.[^2] He was beaten and sent out again without being fed, and so secretly slept over in the house of another burgher, being discovered there by the slaves and sent to the authorities.

Two issues are striking in this case. One is the expectation of urban owners that their slaves must earn money for them, or in Januarij’s case could be maltreated when they did not (Van der Spuij’s cruelty was attested by the other slaves in her household). But also notable is the response of the fiscal. Despite no evidence that Januarij was doing anything more than seeking shelter for the night away from a vindictive owner, the fiscal assumed that he was up to no good. He commented that a houseowner would be legally entitled to kill a strange ‘swarte jongen’ whom he found in his house at night. This was in the year of a general panic by the authorities that slaves in and around Cape Town were getting out of control, which might explain the fiscal’s concern.[^3] Widow Van der Spuij’s maltreatment was, in his opinion, irrelevant. The court was, however, more merciful and imposed a lesser sentence.

[^1]: Modern Tuticorin in South India. The VOC had a trading post there which was under the aegis of the Ceylon government.

[^2]: See 1718 Doulat van Balij, n. 5 on the *koeli geld* system. Maria van der Poel was the widow of Melt van der Spuij, one of the most important and successful alcohol *pachters* of the 1720s. She was therefore left quite well off, which puts her actions in this case in an interesting light.

[^3]: See 1736 Table Valley slaves, for his insistence on stricter controls over slaves in the town. There appears to have been a general scare in and around the town about illicit slave activities in the mid-1730s (see also 1735 Company slaves and 1737 Aron van Madagascar). Certainly the fiscal, Daniel van den Henghel, was particularly earnest about the need to assert tighter control over them.
