Caesar van Madagascar told his owner that he had a ‘right to speak’ his own mind on how best to do his farm work and organise his time – a rare indication in the Cape records of the overt assertion of psychological independence by a slave.[^1] Caesar’s owner retaliated with blows, which Caesar finally resisted, not by attacking his master, but by breaking the sjambok. This was sufficient to ensure his sentence of 25 years’ hard labour in chains. Caesar’s refusal to be totally subservient was a threat to the hierarchy of control in a slave society.[^2]

[^1]: The documentation for this case also includes the *eijsch*, the testimony of Daniel Malan Davidsz and the interrogation of Caesar van Madgascar, CJ 447, ff. 569-90. What is unusual about this case is Caesar’s repeated statement that he had a ‘right’ to dispute his owner’s orders. The North American historian Genovese has argued that this kind of resistance was more revolutionary in its nature than that of escaping from the slave system by desertion, and that it became more evident in the later eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries. It is striking that this case takes place in the 1790s, when news of revolutionary developments in the Americas (including the successful Haitian slave uprising) was circulating in the Cape. These few years saw several other cases of slaves verbally challenging their owners, compare 1792 Mentor van Mosambique and 1794 Abraham van Macassar, but there is also an earlier example, 1759 Slammat van Bougies.

[^2]: This was somewhat less severe than the life sentence recommended in the *eijsch*, CJ 447, f. 575.
