---
title: NEPTUNUS VAN BENGALEN
citation: CJ 788 Sententiën, 1750-1755, ff. 151-56.
---

As Neptunus van Bengalen, slave of the former *heemraad* Philip du Preez, 36 years old at a guess, currently their honours’ prisoner, willingly confessed, without torture or coercion of bonds, of irons, or even the least threat of suchlike, and as it has also appeared evident to the honourable Council of Justice of this government:

That the prisoner was assigned to stay by himself for some time on his owner’s stock farm, named De Klipkrans, in order to look after the livestock, and had to stay with them day and night in the veld during bad weather and heavy rain. The prisoner, forced by the severe cold and since, as he asserts, being almost stark naked and without clothes, sheltered behind some bushes and made a little fire, during which time the stock wandered off and some of them went missing. The prisoner’s owner, because of this reason, and also because the prisoner had not performed to his satisfaction, not only took him away from the aforesaid stock farm and brought him to his home farm, while leaving another slave by the name of Claas van Macassar as cattle herder in his place, but also miserably beat the prisoner twice. Later on, during the month of June this year, the prisoner was again sent by his aforementioned owner to the aforesaid stock farm with some so-called dry or barren stock. At his arrival there, the prisoner did not find the slave Claas at home, which is why he waited at that place until the evening, when the said Claas came home from the field and sat down next to the prisoner at the fire which the prisoner had made. And as the aforesaid Claas then started to rake up the story of his faulty looking-after of his owner’s livestock and to upbraid him in all manner about it, and also since he, Claas, because of his filthy nature, had collected and arranged along the walls the horns of cattle, which had been lying around there and had long ago died and been accounted for; they started to disagree about these matters[^1] and eventually came to blows; during which the aforementioned Claas, being already old and decrepit, came to lie down, at which point the prisoner freed him and let him loose. Yet, when Claas took up his *kirrij* and hit in the direction of the prisoner, he warded off the blow and, at the same time getting angry, took up a piece of firewood and dealt the aforementioned Claas an unfortunate blow to the left side of his head with it, which caused Claas to fall down with dizziness to the ground, although he lifted himself up soon after this and went out of the house. And as the prisoner then became afraid that the aforementioned Claas would go to his owner and complain, and that the prisoner would once again be miserably beaten, he therefore, with the piece of firewood in his hand, also went out of the house with the design to beat to death the said Claas when he found him, in order to prevent him from complaining; to which end, and in order to effect this wicked design of his, he, upon finding the said Claas lying face down on the stones in the Duivenhokrivier, which ran close by the house, gave the same such a blow to the neck with the piece of firewood he was holding in his hand, that he instantly died. After which the prisoner dragged that dead body from the river and some way onto the land; remaining at the aforesaid farm with the stock until the son of the prisoner’s owner came there a few days later and, asking after the said Claas, the prisoner confessed to having perpetrated the murder of the same, and was accordingly delivered into the hands of justice.

And while such a wilful murder cannot be, nor should be, tolerated in a country where law and justice are upheld, but on the contrary must be punished as an example and deterrent to other similarly inclined malefactors.

Thus it is, that the aforementioned honourable Council of Justice, serving today, having read and considered with attention the written *crimineelen eijsch ende conclusie* drawn up and delivered for and against the prisoner by the landdrost of Swellendam, *Sieur* Jan Andries Horack, by reason of his office, as well as having noted the prisoner’s voluntary, verified confession and the other evidence produced with it, further having considered everything serving the case which could possibly have moved their honours, practising justice in the name and on behalf of the high and mighty Lords States General of the United Netherlands, as also of his most serene highness the Lord Prince of Orange and Nassouw, as hereditary Stadtholder, Captain and Admiral General of the Republic, having judged the prisoner Neptunus van Bengalen, is sentencing him with this: to be taken to the place where criminal justice is usually executed here, there to be handed over to the executioner, to be punished in such a way with the rope on the gallows that death will follow, whereupon the same’s dead body is yet again to be hanged, to remain thus until consumed by the air and the birds of heaven, with sentencing to the costs and expenditure of justice.

Thus done and sentenced in the Castle of Good Hope on 27 September 1753, as also pronounced and executed on the 29^th^ thereupon.[^2]

Let the sentence be done, \[signed\] R. Tulbagh.

and 13 others.

[^1]: It is not clear whether Neptune took this as a provocative indication by Claas of his negligence or inadequacy at his job of looking after the cattle, or whether it had some cultural, even ritualistic, significance. Either way, it led to conflict between them.

[^2]: Neptune van Bengalen was sentenced for ‘opsettelijk gepleegde doodslag’ (wilfully committed homicide). He stated, ‘voorts van den doodslagenen slaaf Claas niet anders genoomen te hebben, als desselfs tonteldoos en vuurslag, dat neevens hem op de grond lag’ (further, that he had not taken anything from the beaten-to-death slave Claas, other than his steel and tinder, which were lying next to him on the ground), CJ 35, ff. 101-4. This was the sentence recommended in the *eijsch,* CJ 361, f. 356. The testimonies of Neptunus van Bengalen and Johannes Lodewijk du Pre, as well as those of Louis Fourie senior and Willem Meijer, who found Claas’s body, are in CJ 361, ff. 357-63.
