---
title: JURGEN SCHOLTS ET AL.
citation: CJ 786 Sententiën, 1736-1743, ff. 234-241.
---

Since, from the answered questions in the torture or pain room[^1] by the woodcutter Jurgen Scholts of Dantsig, 26 years old, as well as from the voluntary confessions of his fellow woodcutters Willem Brock of Bockholt, ... years old,[^2] Christoffel Coelmeijer of Paterborn, 28 years old, and Christoffel Hoorneft of Roosdorp, 32 years old[^3] – which confessions were verified voluntarily, willingly and without any torture or coercion of bonds, of irons, or even the least threat of suchlike – all four currently their honours’ prisoners, and from other papers furnished in the case, it has appeared evident:

That in clear moonlight, early on in the night of the 22^nd^ of last January, the prisoners, in accordance with an agreement they had reached with one another, left their allotted post, by name of Paradijs, to go to *De Schuur[^4] * of the honourable Company, where the first and second prisoners, Jurgen Scholts and Willem Brock, each armed with a rope, jumped into the Company’s corral over the wall in order to steal sheep, which they were to hand over to their comrades on the other side, namely the third and fourth prisoners, Christoffel Coelmeijer and Christoffel Hoorneft. These two, however – in spite of being convinced otherwise by the aforementioned Willem Brock and Jurgen Scholts, and even mutually accuse each other of doing it, and which has also been determined from other evidence collected against them – vigorously deny standing by the corral or having waited outside it. The third prisoner, Christoffel Coelmeijer, claims that, while still on their post, he had given his rope to the second prisoner and that, as soon as they were coming close to *De Schuur* and hearing the said Willem Brock speaking about stealing sheep there, he left his comrades and walked back to his assigned post. The fourth prisoner, Christoffel Hoorneft, also claims, equally against the truth, that when the aforementioned Willem Brock and Jurgen Scholts jumped into the corral of *De Schuur* he, having heard and learned on the way from them that they were intending to steel sheep, left them and went from there since he did not want to have anything to do with it, even more so as he had a sore hand; leaving at that time the said Christoffel Coelmeijer standing at the side of the corral.

That on their arrival at the aforementioned corral, the said Jurgen Scholts and Willem Brock immediately tried to each get hold of a sheep in order to tie them up and throw them over the wall to their comrades; but, when they wanted to do this, both were tackled by two slaves, who were hiding in the corral to watch out for those who have often stolen sheep from there. The first prisoner, Jurgen Scholts, inflicted such a deep cut on the abdomen of the slave Coridon, who was trying to pin him down and was loudly calling for help, with his knife that his intestines immediately gushed from the wound, so that, as result of this, he fell to the ground helplessly; dying early in the afternoon of the following day from this wound. That while this was happening, the second prisoner, Willem Brock, likewise in order to get rid of the other slave, named Paris, who was calling vigorously for help, lightly wounded this slave in the chest with his knife. Upon which Paris, in order to save his own life, stabbed Willem Brock with a small sword on his head and hand, whereupon they both wrestled with each other again, \[while\] the second prisoner, insofar as he had any power left, tried to wound the slave Paris. Yet, since they were holding each other by the body, and since Willem Brock was already wounded on the right hand, with which he could not do much, the stabs which he was dealing the slave to his back were of no consequence and, since the said slave Paris continued calling for help, the second prisoner likewise left over the wall, thereby exiting the corral, from which his comrade, the first prisoner Jurgen Scholts, had already fled over the gate, leaving behind him his knife and the ropes they had brought with them. All of which Jurgen Scholts, although \[we have been\] fully convinced \[of the contrary\] by all the prisoners and the two aforementioned slaves, nonetheless stubbornly persists in denying; even denying, during his first interrogation, ever having been present in the aforementioned corral, while he did not confess to having entered it with the second prisoner until under torture; but persists, as far as he is concerned, in denying the rest, while adding that the second prisoner, not he, had wounded Coridon – yet when this slave Coridon was confronted with Jurgen Scholts, he too accused him of it; after which he died.

That after the first and second prisoners had fled from the corral, the first, namely Jurgen Scholts, went (as he claims) to Nieuwland, while Willem Brock returned to his allotted post at Paradijs, where he found the third and fourth prisoners, Christoffel Coelmeijer and Christoffel Hoorneft, who had already returned there an hour before, and where he, Willem Brock, was then bandaged in his sleeping place by Christoffel Coelmeijer. Later, when the first prisoner returned, which happened at the break of day, the prisoners decided together that, in order to cover up the deed, the second prisoner Willem Brock would say that the hatchet came off the helve while he was chopping wood and then fell on his head and hand. Which is what he then also told the chief of Paradijs, who sent him to the hospital to recuperate, on which occasion the first prisoner gave Willem Brock, on his request, an unsheathed knife without a tip. It has further come to light, from the depositions of the *knecht* and a slave of the burgher Jan Laurensz Bestbier, that the third and fourth prisoners Christoffel Coelmeijer and Christoffel Hoorneft had, some time before, driven away in the open pasturage eight sheep from the flock of the said Jan Laurensz Bestbier, of which six returned to the flock of their own accord, while the other two were slaughtered in the bushes by the prisoners, after they had first killed them there.

And considering that such outrageously murderous and abominable acts must, in a country where law and justice are practised, be punished exemplarily, without connivance, as a deterrent to similar malefactors.

Thus it is, that the honourable Council of Justice of the Castle of Good Hope, having seen and read, with carefully considered counsel, the written *crimineelen eijsch ende conclusie* drawn up and delivered for and against the prisoners by the *onderkoopman*, *Sieur* Johannes Needer, acting as fiscal for the interim, and, in addition, having seriously considered the prisoners’ confessions, both those given voluntarily and under torture, together with the other documents and evidence produced in court, moreover, having considered everything which served this case and could have moved their honours, practising justice in the name and on behalf of the high and mighty Lords States General of the free United Netherlands and, having judged all four prisoners, their honours are sentencing them with this: to be taken to the place where criminal sentences are usually executed here, and having been handed over to the executioner, the first two prisoners, Jurgen Scholts and Willem Brock, to be punished with the rope on the gallows in such a way that death will follow, afterwards that their dead bodies be transported from there to the outer place of execution, where they are to be hanged again as prey to the air and birds of heaven; further that the last two prisoners, Christoffel Coelmeijer and Christoffel Hoorneft, be severely scourged with rods on their bare backs by the executioner, after which they are to be branded and riveted in chains, in which to labour for nothing on the honourable Company’s public works for a period of ten years, while denying the further demands against them; the Council sentencing all the prisoners moreover to the costs and expenditure of justice.[^5]

Thus done and sentenced in the Castle of Good Hope on 5 March 1739, and moreover pronounced and executed on the 7^th^ thereupon.

Let the sentences be done, \[signed\] D. v.d. Henghel.

\[signed\] H. Swellengrebel, J.T. Rhenius, Ns. Heijning, Cl. Brand, Js. Möller, Mnus. Bergh, Corns. Eelders, P.R. de Savoije.

In my presence, \[signed\] Js. de Grandpreez, secretary.

[^1]: Scholts was questioned in a room where the instruments of torture were displayed, a means of intimidating a prisoner (the ‘threats’ that are referred to in relation to the others). From a comment in the *sententie* it appears that torture was applied to him, although he only confessed to entering the corral, not to wounding anyone. Torture was used in capital crimes where there was clear evidence of guilt but where the accused refused to admit to it, since full confession was required for the death sentence to be passed (Botha 1962, vol. II: 131).

[^2]: Left blank in the original.

[^3]: These were four of the 17 Company woodcutters recorded in the Cape muster rolls for 1738, VOC 5186, ff. 224-25 (in the previous year there were 28 listed, so numbers fluctuated, VOC 5185, ff. 254-55). They worked at the Company’s woodcutting outpost called Paradijs on the eastern slopes on Table Mountain: the collection of wood for fuel and for building was a major occupation of both Company soldiers and slaves (Sleigh 1993: 257-60; Hall, Malan & Amann 1993; and Cairns 1980a). Jurgen Scholts, who was taken off his ship on the way to Batavia in 1732 because of sickness, had already caused trouble when he tried to desert in 1738, VOC 5962, f. 97. Willem Brock, the other prisoner who was executed, had only landed at the Cape the previous year, VOC 14734, f. 157. Christoffel Coelmeijer, who was consigned to the Cape hospital on his way to Batavia in 1734, drowned in 1742 while serving his sentence of hard labour in chains, VOC 12923, f. 201. Christoffel Hoorneft, who had arrived at the Cape in 1735, returned to Amsterdam in 1749 after his sentence was completed, VOC 5998, f. 231.

[^4]: Not far from Paradijs, at modern Rondebosch, the Company had a post which in the eighteenth century primarily served as a transport station and was called *De Schuur*, after the large shed which served as wagon-house (Sleigh 1993: 180-81). The name ‘Groote Schuur’ only dates from the nineteenth century.

[^5]: Jurgen Scholts denied knowledge of wounding Coridon, while the other three begged for ‘genadige straffe’ (merciful punishment). They were unsuccessful, these sentences for ‘moord en schaapdiefte’ (murder and sheep theft) being confirmed in the *regtsrollen*, CJ 21, f. 18.
