This is a complex and intriguing case of attempted poisoning of an owner by her slaves.[^1] Rachel collaborated with her fellow slave Joseph in obtaining mercury from the Company apothecary, which they placed in the water glass of their owner’s wife, although Rachel claimed not to have understood the implications of this. The plot failed when the mistress noticed something wrong. Both Joseph and Rachel were subsequently tortured by their owner, and eventually confessed. Joseph hanged himself, and Rachel was sentenced to a public whipping and to be placed in chains for the rest of her life.[^2]

*However, the court also ordered that Rachel be sold, never again to be owned by Van Reenen or his family. Although it believed that Rachel and Joseph had committed a punishable crime, it also brought Van Reenen to justice for maltreating his slaves, since he did not have the permission of the fiscal to extract confessions from them and he had also concealed the facts about his actions in Rachel’s court case. The fiscal was sure that Van Reenen had driven Joseph to his suicide. He was fined 1,000 guilders, with costs.* [^3]

[^1]: See Thomson (2003) on this case.

[^2]: Rachel steadfastly denied that she had known she was doing anything wrong, and the sentence recommended in the *eijsch* and given by the court was more lenient than the death sentence usually given to slaves who attempted to harm their owners, but nonetheless included being exposed on the gallows with a rope around her neck, after which she was flogged, branded and riveted in chains for the rest of her life, CJ 363, f. 5 and CJ 36, ff. 2-3. In addition to the testimonies of Rachel and Amarentia van de Caab, included here, that of Jacobus van Reenen is given in CJ 363, ff. 10-16. A s*ententie* is also available in CJ 788, ff. 157-62.

[^3]: Van Reenen claimed that the danger to his wife had ‘hem genoegsaam raasende hadde gemaakt’ (made him almost raving with fury). The court was unsympathetic and Van Reenen was found guilty of punishing and tormenting Rachel van de Caab and Joseph van Bengalen without permission; while the court also ordered Rachel to be sold (for Van Reenen’s profit) and never to come into his or his family’s possession, CJ 36, ff. 6-8 and CJ 363, ff. 21-4.
