---
title: JAN DE THUILOT
citation: CJ 782 Sententiën, 1705-1713, ref. 8, ff. 136-141.
---

I, the undersigned Jean de Thuile, have been summonsed by the landdrost to appear at the Cape before the honourable d’Ableing and his honourable Council at the latest Thursday, 22 December, but through my indisposition it is impossible for me, and therefore I considered it necessary to send my reasons in writing to the honourable d’Ableing and his honourable Council – my reasons are these:

That around sunrise on Wednesday the 4^th^ of this month, I discovered that my keys had been taken away, that same day my slaves and Hottentots had been reaping wheat at Louis le Riche so that I could not ask for my keys until the evening, which is when they came home and I discovered that my slaves and a Hottentot had been drinking, so that I did not doubt that they were the ones who had taken my keys. I first asked the said slave[^1] who had been drinking where my keys were, to which he answered that he knew nothing of it; I then asked the Hottentot, who answered me the same. Therefore, not believing that anybody but them had taken it, I immediately tied them up to make them confess, and after I had asked them many a time if they would confess, and since they did not want to, this forced me to take a rope and to beat them with it, and during this beating the one said to the other: “You give the keys”, while the other one said: “You give them”, from which I realised that they had taken the keys. With this confession I doubled the lashes and gave them some more with the same rope. Pomerijntje[^2] and Skinny Barent came to visit me, whereupon Pomerijntje took Skinny Barent’s cane and also beat \[them\] with it. Upon this Skinny Barent said: “Leave them be, and take them to Stellenbosch tomorrow”, at the same time I untied them from the beam to which they had been tied, leaving them nonetheless still trussed so that they would not run away, in order to take them to Stellenbosch the following day. I ordered my other slave that he should take care of the tied-up ones and, at about midnight, I went to sleep, leaving Pomerijntje and Skinny Barent still up. Skinny Barent said good night to me, but I did not understand it[^3] and then only Pomerijntje remained up and he, according to the report of the slaves and Hottentots, trampled with his foot several times on their chests and did this, so it is said, because of a hatred which he had had against this Hottentot for already more than a year now, and whom he had threatened to beat to death. After getting up in the morning, I saw the *knecht* of *juffrouw* Taillifer, named Philip Menar, who had come on behalf of his *juffrouw* to collect a ram which I had promised her and, when I had given this, I took my farewell of Philip Menar in order to go and turn back my sheep who were walking into the wheat \[fields\]. Philip Menar was in my house and says that he had seen Pomerijntje sticking a piece of burning wood under their noses and burning off their beards. When I got home, my slave said: “Master, untie me, and I will go and look for the keys”, whereupon I untied him and gave two Hottentots with him to go and look for the keys. They returned again without the keys, saying that his \[*sic*\] pockets were loose and that he had lost them, which was false however, as their pockets were fine. Knowing from this their dishonesty, I got ready to go to Stellenbosch and to have them punished, and when I was ready to depart, the Hottentot died. I confess and admit that when I saw this Hottentot dead, I immediately fled, taken with fright, and left my house, without taking care of anything, and on the fourth day of my absence the slave also died, although of these four days he had still spent two with my neighbour Gidion Malherbe where he said that he had been beaten thus by Pomerijntje. Behold, here is everything I have to say and which is the truth, while I pray that the honourable d’Ableing and his honourable Council will do a proper investigation and will order me what pleases them, which I shall do, and I shall do my duty, as I am bound to be.

Their faithful and obedient servant, Jean du Thuile. The superscription \[i.e. address\] is to the honourable d’Ableing, administrator of the government at the Cape of Good Hope, and his honourable Council.

[^1]: The original also has this mixture of singular and plural as regards the slave.

[^2]: Throughout his letter, Jan de Thuilot refers to Christiaan Uijker or Uker as ‘Pomerijntje’, literally ‘little Pomeranian’. Uijker was born in Pomerania (the regions of north-eastern Germany and northern Poland bordering on the Baltic) and arrived in 1693 at the Cape, where he eventually came into possession of a farm close to that of De Thuilot (Franken 1978: 129-30).

[^3]: The Dutch translation is wrong here (Franken 1978: 131). It says: “Barent *pretended* to say good night to me, but I did not understand it”, but after this only Pomerijntje remained to torment the slaves, and Barent disappeared from the scene. It seems as if Barent was leaving and waved or made a sign to Du Thuilot saying goodnight, which he did not understand, which would explain why Barent disappeared and only Pomerijntje was left.
