---
title: SARA
citation: CJ 2489 Inkoomende Brieven, 1786-1788, Deel 5, ff. 59-61.
---

Honourable Lord,

On the 18^th^ of this month, I received a letter from the burgher Jacob van Reenen in which he communicated to me that a certain male slave of his, named November, drowned at the mouth of the Duiwenhoks River. The circumstances of this drowning, which I have heard around, have already caused some suspicions, about which I hope to send two statements before long to your honour, which will completely confirm the grounds of these suspicions.[^1] And today I received a second letter, dated the 27^th^ of this month, in which Van Reenen informs me that a woman slave first hurled her four children into the water and then also herself and drowned together with three of her children. The oldest of these, being a little girl, very luckily hung onto the reeds at the side of the water and thus saved herself. She says that her mother had already earlier tried to incite her to die.[^2]

This last incident, added to the first, and the consequences which could stem from this, made me determined to inform the aforementioned Van Reenen to immediately give me notice when they have fished out the corpse, when I am of the intention, after having deliberated with two of the *heemraden* of this district and after viewing the corpse, to have the body put upon a wheel, erected for this purpose in the vicinity where the deed was carried out; as a discouragement to the other slaves whom, I hope, will by this spectacle have a change of heart if such atrocious ideas may have found a way into their minds.

Hoping that your honour will not take this freedom of mine amiss, as the strongest reasons, already adduced above, are moving me to it, but that you will be pleased to consider the same as a good precaution to protect the said Van Reenen, and the other inhabitants of this district in general, from all such and similar burdensome incidents, and to provide a deterrent to the heathens not to surrender themselves to such raving ideas.

I have added herewith, for your honour’s consideration, copies of the two letters which the aforementioned Van Reenen had sent me.

With which I take the liberty to order myself, most humbly, into the continuing protection of your honour, remaining with humble respect and ever growing esteem,

Honourable lord,

Your honour’s obedient servant,

\[signed\] C. van Nuldt Onkruijdt.

Swellendam, 28 December 1786.

[^1]: These have not been found and may never have been written, so we know no more of the circumstances of November’s death.

[^2]: Van Reenen’s letters were enclosed with this dispatch, CJ 2489, ff. 62-4. There are two copies of these dispatches, but no further correspondence on this matter in the file.
