---
title: JAN DE THUILOT
citation: CJ 312 Criminele Process Stukken, 1708, document 28.
---

Since, some time ago, the provisional landdrost has demonstrated to us how, during the month of last December, the farmer Jan de Thuilot, living in the Wagemaakers Valeij in the district of Drakenstein, had made himself guilty in his own house of two abominable homicides to one of his slaves, Andries, and to a Hottentot working for him, named Caffer. The landdrost was then, at his own request and because of his \[De Thuilot’s\] flight, granted the right to act in anticipation,[^1] together with a first, second and third writ of summons, as well as a fourth mandate in superabundance,[^2] with a premium of twenty-five rixdollars for whoever may apprehend him and deliver him into the hands of justice, besides a penal prohibition against all who support, help to hide or may provide him with any provisions; that if he did not appear on the day advertised but still remained hidden, then these offences will not only be considered to be admitted, in accordance with law, but that he, Jan de Thuilot, would also be considered, being convinced and persuaded of it, the author and perpetrator of the same. So the said landdrost then brought his action, as well as the evidence which supported it, from which the honourable Council of Justice determined it to be clear and evident, as also to have appeared sufficiently:

That when, on the fourth of the said month, the defaulter’s slaves and Hottentots got home from the fields where they had been reaping wheat, he, in an evil temper, on the suspicion that they had taken his keys and hid them, called the said slave Andries and the Hottentot Caffer, tied them, pulled them up by the hands to a beam and thrashed them wretchedly with a halter and continued so long with this until he became tired. That the fugitive then persuaded with threats one Christiaan Uijker, who confessed to have done this, to also give these wretched sufferers about three strokes each. That he, Jan du Thuilot, in addition then tried to trample or kick these people with his foot, but that he was prevented and dissuaded from this by Barent Pietersz. Blom, alias Skinny Barent, who had come by there during this, and who advised him, the delinquent, to untie them, to take them to Stellenbosch, to charge them and to have them punished there according to merit by the officer. That, on their wretched lamentations and the serious exhortations of the aforementioned Skinny Barent, the defaulter did untie and free the sufferers, but, when the said Barent again departed from there, Jan de Thuilot came to the barbaric decision to tie the feet of these two sufferers, so pitifully thrashed, and to hang them from the same beam with their heads downwards and yet again beat them with the same halter over their bodies, letting them hang in this position for about an hour, after which he set them free and then trampled and kicked the Hottentot Caffer in such a way that he presently gave up the ghost; while some days thereafter, the slave too – to all appearences because of this evil chastisement, kicking or trampling – was to die, whereupon he immediately went from his house, took flight and, because of his non-appearance, made himself guilty of these hideous deeds of murder, and disdained justice.

All of which are the most abominable capital crimes, moreover executed in such a cruel barbaric fashion that it fills one with horror, and are punishable as severely as possible in a well-appointed honour- and peace-loving government, where nothing but love, peace and harmony were planted and are continued, and moreover where justice is properly maintained for the restraint and suppression of wanton crimes, excessive dissoluteness and every other evil consequence.

Thus it is, that the honourable Council of Justice, serving today, having seen and read the arraignment, with the other papers and documents which the provisional landdrost *Sieur* Samuel Martini de Mours has produced in court as justification for his case, as well as the *conclusie* he had drawn up and delivered, by reason of his office, against the defendant, defaulter and fugitive, Jan de Thuilot, further having pondered and noted with carefully considered counsel everything which their honours have to take into account in this, practising justice in the name and on behalf of the high and mighty Lords States General of the free United Netherlands and, having judged the defaulter Jan du Thuilot, is sentencing him with this: that when he will have come into the hands of justice here, to be shot with an arquebus[^3] so that death will follow, with confiscation of all his goods with, after the costs and expenditure of justice had been deducted, the one half for the *eijscher* and the other half for the Chamber.[^4]

Thus done and sentenced in the Castle of Good Hope on 5 July 1708.

Pronounced on the 7^th^ thereupon.

\[signed\] L. v. Assenburgh, Joan Corns. d’Ableing, O. Bergh, Jns. Swellengrebel, Willem van Putten, K.J. Slotsboo, J. Brommert, Cornelis Botma, CDH (these letters were set down by Claas Hendrikx Diepenauw), Hendrick Bouman.

In my presence, \[signed\] A. Poulle, secretary.

[^1]: Translation of *provisie*, meaning that one is allowed to omit certain parts of the legal process, in this case the presence of the accused. This case is similar in this technical sense to 1788 David Malan Davidsz.

[^2]: *Sic* for *ex superabundantia*. By law people were allowed three chances, but a fourth one was added ‘in superabundance’.

[^3]: A type of rifle (which went out of fashion in the course of the eighteenth century) with a long barrel which was put on a stand when shooting. Being killed in this way was considered a more honourable death than by hanging.

[^4]: The Orphan Chamber which, apart from administering the inheritance of orphans until they reached their majority, also operated as a poor fund (Visagie 1969: 56-62; De Wet 1981: 172-73). This probably explains why half of De Thuilot’s estate was donated to it.