# JAN DE THUILOT

*Jan de Thuilot, a Huguenot immigrant, was found guilty of killing two of his labourers, a slave named Andries and a Khoi named Caffer. They died after severe whippings inflicted by De Thuilot because he suspected them of stealing his keys. This was despite the advice of a visiting farmer, that errant slaves should be reported to the authorities rather than being punished severely by their owner: in the early eighteenth century, Company authority was only slowly extending into the world of masters and their slaves.[^1]*

*De Thuilot’s letter to the court (written in French) tried to shift the blame for the deaths onto a neighbour who had assisted him in the punishment, but he clearly realised his guilt and fled before he could be arrested. The Council of Justice tried him in absentia,[^2] and sentenced him to be shot.[^3]*

*This was not the first time a Cape burgher had been sentenced to death for murdering a slave, but it was the last time such a sentence was passed in the VOC period.[^4] The fact that this was a double murder, carried out mainly by De Thuilot himself (rather than the result of a whipping ordered by him, but administered by someone else) and including a (nominally) free Khoi servant as victim, may explain its severity. In any event, De Thuilot was not captured and the execution was never carried out.[^5]*

[^1]: As is also revealed in the career of De Thuilot’s contemporary Peter Becker, who sadistically tortured a woman slave of his to death, in spite of Company law to the contrary (Biewenga 1999: 114-15). Theoretically owners were only allowed ‘domestic correction’ of their slaves (*Kaapse Plakkaatboek* I: 36-7), and needed to send slaves for harsher punishment to the judicial authorities, for which service they had to pay. However, owners often took the law into their own hands, despite Company attempts to prevent the maltreatment of slaves (see 1729 Jan Botma, n. 4 and 1766 Nicolaas Heijns, n. 6).

[^2]: For this procedure, see 1788 David Malan Davidsz, n. 15.

[^3]: For the process of this case between its first appearance in the Council of Justice on 19 January 1708 and the passing of the death sentence on 5 July 1708, see CJ 4, ff. 4, 6, 7v, 9v, 12, 44 (reporting De Thuilot’s desertion), 45r-v (payment of *amende* fine) and 48 (death sentence). The documentation also includes the *eijsch,* the letter of Jan de Thuilot in French, with the Dutch translation reproduced here, and the examination of Christiaan Uijker, CJ 312, documents 27-31. Additional information about this case, based on the Stellenbosch criminal records, is given in Biewenga 1999: 113-14. The case, and the background to it, is discussed by Franken 1978: 128-34, who also includes a transcription and linguistic analysis of De Thuilot’s original French letter.

[^4]: Jan van As was executed (by shooting) in 1688 for stock theft and murder of a slave boy. Upham (1997-9) suggests that the death sentence was passed because of Jan’s mestizo origins and because of the severity with which the authorities regarded stock theft. The three other burghers who killed slaves in the seventeenth century were given sentences ranging from fines to banishment (De Wet 1981: 160-61; Upham 1997: 7-8). For similar examples in the eighteenth century, see 1729 Jan Botma and 1749 Jan Lategaan. The next such case, that of Willem Gebhardt, only took place in 1824 (Cairns 1984).

[^5]: De Thuilot was never found and the following year his estate was sequestrated and his farm sold (Franken 1978: 134). De Kock (1950: 190-91) suggests that he might have fled on one of the Company ships.