---
title: BAATJOE VAN MANDHAAR
citation: CJ 789 Sententiën, 1756-1760, ff. 80-91.
---

It has come to appear evident to the honourable Council of Justice of this government, both from the voluntary confession of Baatjoe van Mandhaar, bondsman of the burgher Jan Christoffel Broderik, 30 years old at a guess, currently their honours’ prisoner, as well as from the other documents, all properly verified, added to the case:

That towards the evening of Friday the 21^st^ of the just passed month October, the prisoner, after having pretended to be ill for some days, refused to come down, in accordance with the order of his owner, from the attic of the kitchen, where he had kept the whole day, in order to eat something.[^1] Not only was he unwilling to do this but, what is more, at about nine o’clock that evening, when one of the two youths who were contracted with the prisoner’s owner for learning the smith’s trade,[^2] by the name of Jan Karsten, wanted to enter the aforesaid attic with the intention to go to sleep there, as per usual, the prisoner not only did not scruple to push down from above, unexpectedly and without even the least warning, this apprentice when he was going up to the attic on a ladder (and without people realising at that time that this was done by the prisoner, but were assuming that this youth had fallen down through carelessness), but also shortly thereafter, when the other one of these apprentices, by the name of Frederik Huijsheer, likewise for the aforesaid reason, wanted to come up with the ladder to the attic, the prisoner did not scruple to give him a push with a pointed piece of wood in his face in such a way that he not only got wounded through this, but also fell down from above.

That upon this noise, the prisoner’s owner came into the kitchen and since, because of their alarm, he could not learn from either of these youths who had done that to them, he asked: “Who did this?”, and when this was answered by the prisoner: “Me, *baas*!”, the said Broderik ordered him to come down, upon which the prisoner also said: “At once”, without however doing so. The aforesaid Broderik again ordered this and added to it that if the prisoner did not come down, he would then come up, whereupon the prisoner had the audacity to say in Dutch that he should come up since it was the prisoner’s birthday, while at the same time adding in Portuguese that he would murder his owner, which last was made known through interpretation by his other slaves to the aforementioned Broderik who, since he did not understand Portuguese,[^3] was already busy climbing up the ladder, but was held back by the slaves and prevented from ascending further.

That upon this some of the neighbours came to help,[^4] while at the same time they sent for their honours’ *geweldiger* in order to capture the prisoner, who did not want to come down from the attic at all, with his assistance. The aforesaid *geweldiger* presently rushed in with about eight *caffers* and called to the prisoner that he should come down, but he still, instead of doing this, utterly refused to, besides saying: “I am a Mandhaar, you come up to me”, for which reason their honours’ *geweldiger* ordered the *caffers* with him to climb along the ladder standing there to the trap-door and onto the attic. This was undertaken by the *caffer* Johanna who, when he came close to the attic, was given a blow by the prisoner on the back of his head with an unwrought butt-end of a pistol in such a way that he came to fall down from above as a result of it and remained lying for dead on the ground. Immediately hereafter the prisoner threw down from the attic a chest which would have fallen onto the aforesaid *caffer* had he not been, just a moment before, dragged away from under the trap-door.

That in the meantime the *burgerwacht* also came to help and it was then agreed that, in order to capture the prisoner, the aforesaid attic had to be entered from outside the house, to which end some ladders were fetched. These were first put to the attic windows above the house door in the fire-gable,[^5] and then also to the roof, and at the same time they attempted to enter the attic through one of these windows, and even through making an opening in the roof. However, as soon as the prisoner noticed that the aforesaid windows were being broken open, he swiftly fortified them from the inside with everything that he could find, and when he heard somebody coming onto the roof, he stabbed at him through the thatch with a sword, and in this way also wounded the *caffer* on it in his foot, so that the said *caffer* had to retreat from there. They then finally thought it fit to hack some holes into the walls on both sides of the aforesaid house in order to discover in this way, by lighting the attic through means of candles on long sticks, where the prisoner was who, after he had heard this noise, had started running up and down in the attic and, in order to prevent this \[hacking or entering\], was frantically throwing bottles, stones and everything that he could find at the people who came towards the attic. In the meantime, the burgher Daniel Rood, provided with a pistol loaded with shot, took position in front of one of these openings in order to shoot at the prisoner as soon as he could discover him and get him in sight, and thus to capture him. The prisoner, however, as soon as one could see him on the aforesaid attic, retreated with an unsheathed sword in his hand to a corner behind the chimney and then tried to hide himself in a hole there, but was driven out of it by being shoved from the outside with an iron rod, when he was shot by the aforementioned burgher Daniel Rood and was wounded in his right hand, in which he was then still holding the sword, as well as in his right side, whereupon the prisoner, at great speed, jumped with the sword in his hand from the attic through the window in the fire-gable below onto the street where, after still running about three paces forward, he was taken by the *caffers* and thus came into the hands of justice; which is when it was discovered that the prisoner had wounded himself in the neck and did this with, as he claims, the aforesaid side-arm. In addition, as soon as the prisoner was brought into the prison, he said to their honours’ *geweldiger* that it was aimed at his *baas* and one of the apprentices, while adding that it was better to be punished by the justice than by his *baas*.

And while such a dangerous and premeditated murderous undertaking, accompanied with the injuring of and violent resistance to servants of justice, as well as those of the *burgerwacht* who came to help, cannot be tolerated in any way in a country where law and righteousness are properly upheld, but, on the contrary, must be punished rigorously as a deterrent to similar and other evil scoundrels.

Thus it is that the honourable Council of Justice, aforementioned, serving today, having carefully read and considered the written *crimineelen eijsch ende conclusie*, drawn up and delivered for and against the prisoner by the honourable independent fiscaal Pieter Reede van Oudshoorn, by reason of his office, and further having noted the voluntary, verified confession of the prisoner, as well as everything else which served the case and could possibly have moved their honours, practising justice in the name and on behalf of the high and mighty Lords States General of the United Netherlands, as well as his most serene highness, the Lord Prince of Orange and Nassau, as hereditary Stadholder, Captain and Admiral General of the Republic, and having judged the prisoner, their honours are sentencing him with this: to be taken to the place where criminal sentences are usually executed here, there to be handed over to the executioner and to be tied onto a cross, to be broken alive from the bottom up without the *coup de grâce*, to remain lying thus on the cross until he has given up the ghost, thereafter his dead body to be dragged to the outer place of execution, there again to be placed upon a wheel and to remain thus until being consumed by the air and the birds of heaven; with sentencing to the costs and expenditure of justice.[^6]

Thus done and sentenced in the Castle of Good Hope on 3 November 1757, as well as pronounced and executed on the 5^th^ thereupon.

Let the execution be done, \[signed\] R. Tulbagh.

\[signed\] S. Swellengrebel, Cl. Brand, Corns. Eelders, D. d’Aillij, Jn. Fr. Tiemmendorf, Pieter Coningh, H.J. Prehn, C.G. Wieser.

\[signed\] L.S. Faber, sworn clerk.

[^1]: According to other testimonies in this case, Baatjoe was sick and was waiting for medication from the doctor (CJ 369 f. 507v). Baatjoe stated in his interrogation that he refused to come down because he heard his owner say that he was lazy and that he wanted to beat him to death, CJ 369, ff. 519 and 522v.

[^2]: This is a very rare mention of artisan training among Cape Town’s burgher population. It is noteworthy that the apprentices slept in the attic together with the slaves but that one of them, Frederick Huijsheer, is referred to in the *regtsrollen* as a burgher, CJ 39, f. 118. On artisans at the Cape, see De Wet 1981: 62-76 and Worden 2002a.

[^3]: While by this stage Creole Portuguese was common as a contact language amongst Cape slaves, knowledge of it was not so widespread amongst settlers; see the discussion of this in 1763 Christina Strang, n. 12.

[^4]: According to the testimony of Jan Christoffel Broderik, these included the surgeon Francois van Nirop, who told Baatjoe to come down in Malay, CJ 369, f. 508v.

[^5]: The fire-gable (*brandgeevel)* was the central gable above the front door which prevented burning thatch from falling on people escaping from the house, or from scorching the front door. It usually also included windows which let light into the attic. We are grateful to Antonia Malan for this information.

[^6]: The charge of attack on Baatjoe’s owner, the *burgerwacht*, servants of the court and other persons, as well as the wounding of two servants and the burgher Frederick Huijsheer and the sentence, was recorded in the *rollen*, CJ 39, ff. 117-20. In his cross-examination, Baatjoe stated that he knew he had done wrong but that ‘ik kan het niet helpen, en laat het aan de groote heeren over’ (I cannot help it and I leave it in the hands of the important lords), CJ 369, f. 522v.