This concerns an attic siege at the Cape Town house of the burgher blacksmith Jan Broderik, where the slave Baatjoe van Mandhaar[^1] had barricaded himself.[^2] Baatjoe’s desperate resistance bore similarities to amok cases, including lashing out at anyone who came near him and attempted suicide.[^3] His use of Portuguese as a means of concealing his true intention from his owners is an intriguing indication of complexity of language usage in the colony, and the case is especially revealing for the details it gives of the police force of the VOC town, the* geweldiger[^4] *and* caffers *who attempted to break into the roof from outside. Baatjoe’s sentence of breaking alive on the wheel was one of the most severe punishments that the court could give, perhaps reflecting its alarm at the number of amok cases and of violent resistance by East Indian slaves in the town at this period.

[^1]: Modern Mandar on the south-west coast of Sulawesi. It seems likely that this is the same slave as the one with this name in 1751 Januarij van Boegies et al.

[^2]: The documentation in this case also includes the *eijsch,* testimonies of Broderik, the *geweldiger*, Huijsheer, Baatjoe and two doctors’ reports, CJ 369, ff. 502-25.

[^3]: The *geweldiger*, Jan Jacob Doeksteen, stated that he had been called to Broderik’s house because one of the slaves ‘amok maakte’ (was running *amok*), CJ 369, f. 511). For *amok*, see 1744 Barkat van Timor, n. 3.

[^4]: The *geweldiger* arrived at the house when called to do so by Broderik, and brought with him eight *caffers*, whom he commanded during the operation*,* CJ 369, ff. 511-15. For the *caffers* and their role, see 1719 Jonas van Manado, n. 13.