These testimonies given to the Stellenbosch authorities concern the sale of Anthonij, a slave who had been sick for some time. Although the purchaser believed that Anthonij could be ‘fattened up’ and would recover his health, his inability to eat alarmed the* knecht *working on his new owner’s farm. The previous owner was called, together with a doctor. We do not know if Anthonij survived his illness, but it seems unlikely, since the new purchaser apparently wanted to recoup his losses from Anthonij’s previous owner, on the grounds that he had known that he was terminally ill when he sold him.[^1] To this end he had drawn up attestations of people who could testify to the slave’s illness. Note the surprise of the burgher Jacob Mundes, that Anthonij was being transported by the wife of his new owner on horseback, rather than walking alongside her. Whether this was because all slaves were expected to walk, or because it was considered unseemly for a male slave to be on horseback with a burgher woman, is not clear.[^2]

[^1]: According to Batavian legislation, a slave purchaser could claim back his costs if the slave was proved to be permanently sick, mentally incapacitated or ‘mad’, but there is no evidence that this happened in this case. See Biewenga 1999: 108-9.

[^2]: Biewenga (1999: 108) sees this detail, and the concern over Anthonij’s health, as a sign that slaves, though possessions, were treated ‘like humans’. Concern for the health of a newly purchased slave may have indicated more about the owners’ desire to ensure that the investment in their purchase would be worthwhile.