Doulat was found guilty of stealing cash, clothing and food at different times from farms in the Stellenbosch district, and of running away when he was chased. What makes the story particularly interesting is that he was the slave of a Ternate prince, Denge Mamouti (also referred to as Daije Mosis[^1]) who had been exiled to the Cape by the VOC authorities in Batavia.[^2] Slaves formed an important part of the households of men of wealth and status throughout Southeast Asia, and high-ranking Asian exiles frequently brought an entourage of their wives, children and slaves with them to the Cape.[^3] That their authority over their exiled households was respected by the Company is shown by the opportunity the court authorities gave to Denge Mamouti to defend his slave, and the importance attached to the permission that he gave for them to punish Doulat, especially necessary since he was sentenced to death.

Doulat’s own interrogation (which is not published here since it repeats the material in the *sententie*) was carried out in Portuguese,[^4] and the documents read to Denge Mamouti were in Portuguese and Malay, both of which were widely spoken in Southeast Asia, and for which there were interpreters at the Council of Justice in Cape Town.[^5]

[^1]: This was probably a bad phonetic rendering by the deputy landdrost, who did not know any Malay or Portuguese, hence his use of an interpreter.

[^2]: This exile is variously referred to in the records as Dain Mamoodi or Daeng Mamoetie. When he came to the Cape is not clear, the earliest reference in the archival documents being February 1717. To the VOC he was a somewhat troublesome character. In 1721 he promised one of his other slaves, Leander van Malabar, his freedom if he refunded him his purchase price. However, when he saved enough to do so, Denge Mamouti reneged on his offer (Leibbrandt 1906: 665). The following year he was banished to Robben Island after he had been found guilty of encouraging both slaves and free people to his house for ‘gambling, whoring and other indecent activities’ (De Kock 1950: 194; Penn 1996: 21). From the inception of the *Bandieten rollen* in 1728 he appeared every year as ‘den sogenaamde prins van Ternaaten, van d’ Caab na ’t eijland gesonden 28 Novembr. 1722, tot nadre ordre’ (the so-called prince of Ternate, sent from the Cape to the island on 28 November 1722, until further notice), the last phrase meaning that his term of banishment was not specified, unlike most other convicts, (CJ 3188, ff. 8-9). This entry was repeated every year until 1747 (ff. 372-73) when he died.

[^3]: Several hundred Asian political prisoners were exiled to the Cape, which was favoured as a place of banishment by the VOC authorities in Batavia. Sheikh Yusuf is probably the best known today, Ward 2002: 120-83. Pangerans Seloringpasar, a Javanese prince in exile at the Cape in the 1720s, petitioned the governor to have six of his personal slaves punished for ‘vagabondery’ (vagabonding), the men to work on Robben Island and the women to be kept in the Slave Lodge. Ward (2002: 158) comments that ‘\[i\]n a remarkable display of power and authority, the royal exile and the Company conspired to ensure the continued oppression of the slave population in the small colony’. Denge Mamouti’s acquiescence fits this general pattern.

[^4]: CJ 322, document 59. Also included in the documentation for this case is the *eijsch*, CJ 322, document 60.

[^5]: See 1775 Moses van de Caab for a discussion of slave use of Creole Portuguese and Malay.
