Julij van Timor[^1] stole items from his owner’s bedroom at night and then attacked other members of the family, slaves and a* knecht *who tried to apprehend him. He had been recently purchased in order to do blacksmith work on the farm, under the unusual arrangement that he could be returned if he did not prove satisfactory.[^2]

Julij fled after these events and was only recaptured several days later on the beach in Cape Town.[^3] Although the events took place in April, some of the testimonies were only collected several weeks later and sentence was not passed until August.[^4]

[^1]: Julij gave his name as Julij van Boegies in his interrogation, CJ 410, f. 305, article 1, and was referred to as such in the *regtsrollen* and the *sententie*, but in all of the documentation in the Stellenbosch landdrost archive he is consistently called Julij van Timor. This is an indication of the inconsistency of slave toponyms.

[^2]: In his interrogation, Julij stated that he worked as a blacksmith on the Ehlers farm, CJ 410, f. 305, article 1 and this explains why he was sold on approval. Presumably his skills as a smith needed to be tested and proved. Artisans at the Cape often had slaves with particular skills (Shell 1994: 164-65, and see 1719 Jonas van Manado and 1757 Baatjoe van Mandhaar for other examples). On the hiring of artisan slaves, see De Kock 1950: 57-8, Schoeman 2001: 585-86; and 1794 Abraham van Maccassar, n. 5.

[^3]: It is interesting that he ran away to Cape Town rather than into the interior. By the later eighteenth century, Cape Town was becoming a larger community in which runaways might hope to conceal themselves and obtain shelter (particularly if they had kin or friends there), although this phenomenon only became marked in the earlier nineteenth century, Worden 1994: 37-8.

[^4]: The case came to court in August, since Julij steadfastly denied guilt. The paragraph at the end of the *sententie* states that he was finally ‘judicially convinced’ of his guilt, which may indicate that he was tortured. Documentation for the case included the *eijsch* (dated 20 June 1776), two testimonies of Johann Ehlers, and testimonies of Christoffel Davel, Jan Wagenmaker of Bergen op den Zoom, Johanna Catharina Nel, Ontong van Boegies and Julij van Timor, CJ 410, ff. 257-316.
