Here a Cape Town slave attacked his partner (also a slave), with whom he had had several children, because he saw another slave in the house rocking the cradle of their child and became jealous. He ran away but, without proper clothing and food, was forced to give himself up.[^1]

Apart from the nature of the relationships and jealousies between slaves in an urban household, the case contains a number of details of interest. Owners and burghers were entirely absent from the account of the events[^2] and there is some rare insight into the emotional feelings of a slave.[^3] The household also had a specialised slave cook (Schindelaar was a lieutenant-captain and clearly upheld a relatively prosperous lifestyle).[^4] The weapon used in the attack was a* parrang*, a Southeast Asian term for a short machete. Januarij could not exist on his own on the mountain without prior preparation, and was able to regain access to the house via a Chinese resident who lived in the outbuildings.

[^1]: These two statements are the only ones that were taken. There is unfortunately no statement from Augustus. A *sententie* is available in CJ 788, ff. 220-24.

[^2]: The slaves appear to have been left alone in the house. Both their owner and his wife had recently died, so they may have been looking after the house and child while Schindelaar’s estate was being finalised. It is likely that their owners were victims of the 1755 smallpox epidemic which ravaged Cape Town (see Viljoen 1995: 28-35).

[^3]: Notably in Januarij’s words to Clara: ‘Jij hebt een ziel en ik heb een ziel’ (you have a soul and I have a soul).

[^4]: Schindelaar arrived at the Cape in 1731 as a soldier, but worked himself up through the ranks until he became lieutenant-captain in 1750. He then married Johanna Delitzsch, who was the widow of the previous incumbent of that post (Hoge 1946: 361-2). An inventory of his large and prosperous house on the Heerengracht was taken in August 1755 when Johanna Delitzsch died (MOOC 8/8, document 34½).