---
title: PATIENTIE VAN MANACABO AND DECEMBER VAN BOEGIES
citation: CJ 788 Sententiën, 1750-1755, ff. 212-19.
---

Since Patientie van Manacabo,[^1] bondsman of the burgher Jan Brouwer, 30 \[years\] old at a guess, and December van Bougies, slave of the burgher Frederick Simon Plaagman, about 26 years old, currently their honours’ prisoners, voluntarily confessed, without torture or coercion of bonds, of irons, or even the least threat of suchlike, and since it has also appeared evident to the honourable Council of Justice of this government:

That about three months ago now, when the prisoners agreed with each other to desert from their masters, the second prisoner stole from his owner a crooked sabre from the attic and, at about nine o’clock at night, went with it to the house of the first prisoner’s owner, Jan Brouwer, where he joined the first prisoner in the kitchen, where the second prisoner remained until Brouwer and his *knecht* went to sleep, which is when the first prisoner stole from the room in which his *baas* and the *knecht* were lying asleep and of which the door stood open, a musket, two pistols, and five shot cartridges, and likewise from the kitchen a cartridge case; with which the prisoners, after they each had first loaded a pistol with loose gunpowder, undertook their flight during the night; the first prisoner carrying the musket, one pistol and the cartridge case, and the second prisoner the other pistol and the broadsword, marching thus through the night, reaching Baas Harmens Craal[^2] by daylight and, during the following night, arrived at Baaij Fals.[^3] At which place they stayed for about a month in the mountains, sustaining themselves, according to them, with food which the shepherd of the burgher Hendrik Feerssen, named April, and who was known to the first prisoner, would occasionally give them from his knapsack, and who also later, after they had chopped a bullet of one of the spent cartridges they had with them into four parts, loaded the musket with it, discharged it, while each of the prisoners was likewise loading a pistol with cartridges, and then loaded it once more.

That after some time, on a certain evening at nightfall, in fact at the beginning of the past month October, when the prisoners were on the slopes of the mountain, they were discovered by the soldier assigned to Baaij Fals, Barent Janssen,[^4] who was looking for horses, and who, thinking that they were the slaves of the burgher Jan Munnick, called out to them when he got within about five or six paces of them, and asked them if they had seen any horses; at which they suddenly turned around, and simultaneously each taking from his side a pistol, and at once, with stretched-out arms and cocked triggers, aimed these pistols at Janssen, while saying to him: “No, we have not seen any horses”. And so Barend Janssen, because of this unexpected and dangerous display, and because he was not equipped with any gun and, moreover, noticed that one of the prisoners had a musket as well, and the other one also something else on his shoulder, which he could not see properly because of the darkness, got very frightened. He then said to the prisoners: “*Paaij*,[^5] do not harm me, I am not looking for you, because I have lost horses”, to which the prisoners then, after having told Janssen: “If you are looking for horses, it is fine, don’t come closer, but go backwards and let us not see you going to the Baaij” and, after having exchanged some words among themselves which Janssen did not understand; they dropped to their sides the pistols aimed at him. Upon this Janssen went backwards a couple of paces from them; however, when the prisoners, who were continuing on their way to the Baaij, were out of sight, he too set out to Baaij Fals where he gave a report of this to the postholder, while the prisoners were meanwhile also on their way to Baaij Fals.

That later, after about four days, the first prisoner, since he thought it fit to set out to the Cape in order to sell his *duffeltje[^6] * and bring back food for it, handed over to the second prisoner the musket, one pistol and the cartridge case and went to the Cape. However, along the way he repented and did not return again, but proceeded to his owner, by whom he was delivered into the hands of justice.

That on Saturday the 8^th^ of the past month November, the shepherd of the aforesaid Feerssen, named April, came to the foot of the mountains and found the second prisoner asleep there with a pistol in his left arm, and also under the stones in a hole next to him, a musket, a pistol, a ramrod and a cartridge case, which April, thinking that he was a deserter, silently took it all away, which the second prisoner, who had woken up in the meantime, also allowed, on condition that he would give him some food as he was very hungry. April then told the second prisoner that he did not have any food with him, but that he should come in the evening to his master’s house in Baaij Fals, that he would then give him something to eat. Upon this, the second prisoner, armed with the one pistol, appeared there that very same evening, which is when April also gave him something in the kitchen. Yet, shortly hereafter, two slaves of the postholder of the Baaij came there, because of the warning given by the said April, and the second prisoner was captured by them and with the help of the aforementioned April, and thus also came into the hands of justice.

And since such a highly perilous escape and perpetrated public violence cannot be, nor should be, tolerated in a country where justice is practised but, on the contrary, must be punished most rigorously as an example and deterrent to other similarly inclined malefactors.

Thus it is, that the honourable Council of Justice, aforementioned, serving today, having read and considered with attention the written *crimineelen eijsch ende conclusie* drawn up and delivered for and against the prisoners by the honourable independent fiscal, Pieter Reede van Oudshoorn, by reason of his office, and having noted their voluntarily given confessions and the other evidence added to it, everything properly verified in court, and further everything else which could serve the case and could have moved their honours in any way, practising justice in the name and on behalf of the high and mighty Lords States General of the United Netherlands, as well as his most serene highness, the Lord Prince of Orange and Nassau, as heretidary Stadtholder, Captain and Admiral General of the Republic, and having judged both the prisoners Patientie van Manacabo and December van Boegies, their honours are sentencing them with this: to be taken to the place where criminal sentences are usually executed here, there to be handed over to the executioner, to be tied to a stake, to be severely scourged with rods on their bare backs, thereupon to be branded, further each to be riveted in chains for a period of ten consecutive years, thus to be sent back home to their owners, provided they pay the costs and expenditure of justice; with the Council denying the further or differently drawn up *eijsch* of the honourable Officer.[^7]

Thus done and sentenced in the Castle of Good Hope on 4 December 1755, as also pronounced and executed on the 6^th^ thereupon.

Let the execution be done, \[signed\] R. Tulbagh.

\[signed\] S. Swellengrebel, R.S. Allemann, Ns. Heijning, Cl. Brand, Corns. Eelders, D. d’Aillij, Jn. Raeck, P. Artoijs, Hk. vn. dr. Heijde.

In my presence, \[signed\] Jn. Fr. Tiemmendorf, secretary.

[^1]: An alternative spelling for Menengkabo (now Menangkabu) in Sumatra (Bradlow and Cairns 1978: 128).

[^2]: A well-known landmark at the Cape, this Company outpost was close to Sandvlei, not far from the farm Zwaanswijk (Koeman 1955: 263; Sleigh 1993: 264-65).

[^3]: This seems to refer not to the region of False Bay, but more narrowly to Simon’s Bay, where the VOC had had an outpost since 1743 (Sleigh 1993: 302-3).

[^4]: Recorded in the *scheepsoldijboek* of the vessel Nieuwvijvervreugd as Bernhard \[*sic*\] Janssen van Steenderen. He had arrived in 1754 and was one of the 38 soldiers based ‘agter de Steenbergen in de bhaaij fals’ (behind the Steenbergen at Baaij Fals), VOC 5203, f. 208. He stayed at the Cape until 1759 when he went to Colombo, where he worked for the VOC until his death in 1765, VOC 13071, f. 183.

[^5]: An interesting word whose origins are disputed. Both *paai* and *maai* appear regularly in eighteenth-century Cape texts, derived from the Portuguese for ‘father’ and ‘mother’, used as a respectful form of address to an older person, but at the Cape specifically older slaves (and sometimes for Khoi). Scholtz, however, argues that at least *paai* is not a loan from Portuguese, claiming it ultimately derived from Dutch (Scholtz 1965: 183-84 and, for further examples from contemporary Cape texts, Scholtz 1972: 153).

[^6]: A thick, woollen coat, also called a *buffeltje* (Gawronski 1996: 202).

[^7]: Patientie van Manacabo and December van Boegies were charged with running away, theft of guns and ‘publicq geweld’ (public violence). They claimed that they had not meant to cause mischief by their possession of guns but had only shot wildlife from time to time for subsistence. The sentence followed that recommended in the *eijsch*, CJ 37, ff. 104-6. See also Heese 1994: 79-80 for a discussion of this case as an example of the Council of Justice taking mitigating circumstances into account: if these slaves had used their weapons or had not willingly surrendered, they would have received the death penalty.