# CLAAS VAN BENGALEN

*Claas van Bengalen and Augustus van Malabar[^1] both worked on the same farm and regularly fought each other over the female slave Aurora, to the extent that their owner’s wife, Anna Marais, had been forced out of the house[^2]. In this episode, the rivalry took a ritualised as well as literal form. It was also surrounded with racial and sexual slurs by both Anna Marais and Claas van Bengalen, revealing the complexity of tensions that could arise when slaves (from different regions and of both sexes), a free black and a farmer’s wife lived in close and tense proximity.[^3]*

*It is noteworthy that Claas was punished by the Council of Justice primarily for his threats to his owner’s wife rather than for planning to escape.[^4]*

[^1]: Augustus’s toponym is not given in these records, but according to the account of this case by Pretorius (1979), which gives more background on the participants, he was from Malabar.

[^2]: Anna’s husband, Francois Retief, whom she married in 1741, was absent from the farm at the time, which explains the impact of Claas’s reported threat to his owner’s wife. Retief was away at the annual military exercise in Stellenbosch (Pretorius 1979: 43-5; for the origins of this practice, see Biewenga 1999: 76-82). For a similar example of tensions that arose when the male slave-owner was away for the same reason, see 1763 Christina Strang.

[^3]: Anna was baptised in 1722 and so was probably in her early to mid-twenties at the time, De Villiers & Pama 1966, vol. II: 529 and 776; Heese & Lombard 1986-2004, vol. 5: 445. Retief had six male slaves, but only one female. The sexual imbalance of slaves at the Cape, and particularly in the rural districts, was evident throughout the VOC period since most imported slaves were males. Only with the increasing proportion of locally born slaves at the end of the eighteenth century, and especially after the abolition of the slave trade in 1808, did this imbalance correct itself (Armstrong & Worden 1989: 133).

[^4]: Claas was charged with using ‘geheele onbetamelijke en brutaale segswoorden aangaande sijne lijfvrouw’ (wholly inappropriate and insolent words concerning his mistress) as well as ‘andere schelmereijen in ’t afweesen van sijn meester’ (other knavish tricks during the absence of his master), CJ 26, f. 106. The *eijsch* recommended that Claas be whipped, branded and sent to the public works in chains for 25 years, CJ 350, f. 624. The actual sentence passed was more lenient: Claas was to be whipped and sent back to his owner to work in chains for 3 years, while his owners were to pay the costs, CJ 26, f. 107. Claas claimed that he did not mean to do his mistress any harm by his words, and that Augustus falsely accused him and ‘altijt leugens bij de baas van mij aangebragt heeft’ (was always telling lies about me to the *baas*), CJ 26, f. 106 and CJ 350, f. 641. The testimonies published here from the originals taken by the Stellenbosch landdrost, as well as the interrogation of Claas, are also available in CJ 350, ff. 625-41.