This case reveals the problems that slaves faced in forming permanent emotional and sexual relationships when they could be separated by sale at any time.[^1] Anthonij’s attempts to get back to the farm from which he had been sold were caused by his separation from Jannetie, the slave whom he refers to as his ‘wife’, although VOC law did not recognise the right of slaves to marry.[^2] His discovery that she had taken another partner after his permanent and forced departure led to his attack on her and his subsequent attempted suicide – whether from despair at her infidelity, or from fear of punishment for his attack, is unclear.

It is noteworthy that the court imposed a milder sentence than the death penalty recommended in the *eijsch*,[^3] presumably having some sympathy for Anthonij’s predicament. Nonetheless, he was still whipped, branded, forced to work in chains and returned to his new owner. Given his attempted suicide, it is questionable which fate he might have preferred. Of Jannetjie we know no more.

Both the *sententie* and the interrogation of Anthonij van Goa are included in this case. Although there is much repetition, each document has its own character and insights. From the *sententie* we learn more details of the case as a whole, while the answers Anthonij gives to the questions of the court bring us closer to his own voice and motivations. It is a rare example of a slave’s direct testimony, albeit mediated through the scribe of the court.

[^1]: Sales were relatively frequent, since the Dutch laws of inheritance, which often divided up estates amongst a large number of heirs, frequently led to the break-up of slaveholdings, and auctions of household goods (which included slaves) were regular occurrences. Sometimes slaves were bought by relatives, but they were still usually transferred to new locations and separated from the other slaves with whom they had lived, worked and formed relationships, Worden 1985: 49-50 and Shell 1994: 104-21.

[^2]: Slave marriage was not made legal until 1823. Only freed slaves were allowed to marry before then, Shell 1994: 320. Nonetheless, some slaves formed permanent partnerships which were often referred to by the authorities as ‘concubinage’. See 1749 Reijnier van Madagascar n. 1 for a discussion of this.

[^3]: The *eijsch* recommended that Anthonij be executed by hanging with a knife displayed over his head, CJ 325, ff. 76-7. There is no record of this case in the *regtsrollen*, CJ 7 \[1721\], but it is apparent from the statement at the end of the *sententie* that the milder sentence here proposed was carried out on 29 March 1721.
