# SCIPIO VAN DE CUST

*This testimony by Scipio van de Cust[^1] is part of the voluminous records of the trial of a group of slaves who had escaped from their owners and hid out in the Blaauwberg, Tygerberg and Koeberg areas, from where they raided several farms over a period of six months, and other slaves who had aided them in the process.[^2] It vividly describes their night attack on the widow Ten Damme’s farmhouse and the responses of the slaves and the* knecht *who lived there. Scipio felt no affinity with the slave runaways, whom he describes as ‘bad men’.[^3] The chief target of the slave attackers was the* knecht *Adam van Dijk who, to their frustration, escaped into the night.[^4]*

[^1]: ‘Van de Cust’ referred to the east coast of India, or the Coromandel region (Bradlow & Cairns 1978: 126).

[^2]: The gang had been active in the area for several months, and alarmed the authorities so much that a massive commando of ninety men was sent out to capture them (Penn 1999: 85-6). Nineteen slaves were charged with criminal activities, which included theft, cattle theft, conspiracy to murder, housebreaking, violent robbery, public disorder and maintenance of slave runaways. The *eijsch* covers eighty pages, and the documentation includes a *sententie*, CJ 785, ff. 12-55, and the testimonies of the accused, as well as a number of witnesses, CJ 330, ff. 475-982. One slave died in prison during the proceedings, three were hanged, and the remaining fifteen were whipped and branded, and then returned to their owners with the stipulation that they work in chains for four years (for eight of them) or three years (for the remaining seven), CJ 9, ff. 47-8 \[1726\].

[^3]: Biewenga (1999: 110) cites this as an example of slave loyalty to their owners. Certainly everyone inside the farmstead, including the slaves, were under attack, and Scipio refused to join the runaways, although it may be, considering this was a statement to the judicial authorities, that he was particularly keen to emphasise his opposition to those facing serious criminal charges.

[^4]: This may have been because he was in a position of chief authority on the widow’s farm and was defending the house with his gun, but the runaways’ concern to capture him might suggest a deeper motive. Aaron van Bengalen, one of the attackers, was owned by Ten Damme and worked on her cattle outpost, so is likely to have come under Adam van Dijk’s command. As overseers, *knechten* were often the focus of slave resentment (see 1761 Johan Spring in ’t Veld, n. 1). Aaron had proposed to his fellow runaways that they should break into the house, tie up the *knecht* and murder him before stealing its contents, but while some agreed, others responded that they only needed to tie him up, not to kill him, CJ 785, ff. 33-4. Clearly Aaron bore Adam van Dijk a particular grudge, as is borne out by the testimony of Schipper van de Cust Coromandel, who claims that Aaron van Bengalen told his fellow runaways when they wanted to take some of the plates in the house: ‘mijn juffrouws goed moeten wij niet meede neemen, maar de knegts goed wel, die heeft mijn bloed gesoogen, ik sal het zijne ook weder zuijgen’ (we must not take my *juffrouw*’s stuff, but those of the *knecht*, he has sucked my blood, and I will suck his again), CJ 330, f. 952. Although Aaron was a ringleader, he was not among those convicted, and seems to have avoided capture.