---
title: SCIPIO VAN DE CUST
citation: CJ 330 Criminele Process Stukken, 1726, ff. 939-44.
---

Statement, given on the request of the honourable independent fiscal, Adriaan van Kervel, by the slave Scipio van de Cust, belonging to *Juffrouw* Helena Gulix, widow of the late Willem ten Damme, who had been chief surgeon here, the contents being as follows:

That the testifier is stationed on the farm of his mistress, named the Brakke Fontain, and when, on a certain Saturday evening at ten o’clock, at his guess, he – as also the *knecht*, named Adam van Dijk, and the slaves Schipper and Floris – had gone to sleep in the house there, there was soft knocking on the back door of the house. That the testifier, who was still half drowsy, heard that there was even louder banging on the door, whereupon he asked who was knocking on the door, that from the outside a certain Aaron van Bengalen, belonging to his owner and being stationed at the post at Coeberg, said to him: “Come on, open the door”, without the testifier opening the door at that time, though he did hear a person standing at the outside saying: “You damned fool, why do you not break open the door?” That thereupon the door was broken open, without being able to say whether this was done with an axe or a hatchet, though he did see in the morning that something sharp had been used to hack at and into the door; and because of this noise the aforementioned *knecht* Adam van Dijk came from his bedroom to the testifier and the slave Schipper in the kitchen and said to them: “Who the hell is banging on the door like that?”, and intended, without having a gun with him, to go outside the door to see who was there, \[but\] was kept back by the testifier, who said to him: “They are not good people, you must not go outside”. That the *knecht* thereupon went back to his bedroom, telling the testifier to make some light, which he did by lighting both a candle in the room as well as a lamp in the kitchen. The *knecht* Adam van Dijk loaded two muskets and a pair of pistols with shot, giving one of the first-mentioned to the slave named Schipper, with the order to watch carefully that nobody entered the house or fired at them.

That a certain slave Floris, also belonging to *Juffrouw* Ten Damme, who slept in a lean-to room,[^1] woke up from the aforesaid noise and, (according to his own story) being surprised, tried to run away, to which end he opened a window in the aforesaid lean-to room, and when he noticed that there were two persons armed with muskets and who were taking aim at the window with the muzzles of the same, he jumped back and informed the aforementioned *knecht* of this.

The testifier declares that when the *knecht* had been told this by Floris, he saw this *knecht* shooting open a window of that lean-to room with a pistol, after having first warned the persons standing outside that they should give themselves up as prisoners. That thereupon the said *knecht* went to the hacked door, and that, when a shot was fired from the outside around the window, this *knecht* also fired a shot with the pistol at the broken door. That thereupon the aforenamed *knecht* said to the slaves in the house: “*Jongens*, I must flee, let them take what they want”, whereupon this *knecht*, wearing only a blue nightshirt, fled through this broken door past several slaves, who were standing in front of it, and who were fugitives, being immediately followed by all these slaves calling: “Pege, pege” or, in other words: “Seize him, seize him”.

That all these *jongens* shortly afterwards again came to the house, except for the aforementioned Aaron van Bengalen, who returned about half an hour after this, being covered in mud, and who dried himself there in the house by the fire.

That while he and the slaves of his mistress were standing in the kitchen, the fugitives – amongst whom he knows by name: the aforementioned Aaron van Bengalen, Benjamin of Jan Mostert, as well as Hercules of the same, and Jacob of Thobias Mostert – went into the room of the *knecht*, \[where\] one of the same slaves broke or hacked open the chest of the *knecht*, without him knowing who it was; nevertheless, that a big *jongen*, whom he also cannot name, threatened them with a musket that if they show any resistance, they would be massacred. Further, that they stole with the others from this room: half a *mud* of flour, one *schepel* of rice, six loaves of bread, two muskets, two pistols, four pewter table plates, and that they then stole from the *knecht* Adam van Dijk the or, in fact, all of his goods, which were gathered into a bundle by the fugitives and carried through the door, without him being able to say of what it consisted, but he does know that the *knecht* had owned shirt and jacket buttons of gold and silver.

That with the return of the fugitives, after they had pursued the *knecht*, the slave Schipper wanted to shoot at them, yet that the testifier had dissuaded him from doing this, since he was afraid that the same might murder them, testifying also, apart from this, that when Aaron van Bengalen came to the farm, he had at least twice said: “It grieves me not having got the *knecht*”. That Jacob of Tobias Mostert had urged him, the testifier, as well as his fellow slaves, to also run away, yet that this was refused and declined by them.

All of which testified above, is declared by the deponent to be the whole truth, asserting to be convinced of its accuracy as given in the text, while offering to subsequently confirm all of the above, if necessary.

Thus done and testified at the Cape of Good Hope on 27 May 1726, in the presence of the assistants Martinus Heems and Johannes Henricus Blanckenberg, requested hereto as witnesses of faith.

This X mark was made by the testifier, Scipio van de Cust.

As witnesses, \[signed\] Ms. Heems, Js. Hs. Blanckenberg.

With my cognisance, \[signed\] Dl. Thibault, secretary.

[^1]: This is refers to a room tacked on behind the existing structure, entered through an internal door from the house and with a window facing out into the yard. Such rooms were relatively common in inventories of the period and often had guns and other possessions housed in them. We are grateful to Antonia Malan for this information.
