This case of a group of runaway slaves is particularly interesting for the insights it gives into the world of which Cape Town slaves formed a part by the late eighteenth century. The group obtained forged letters claiming to give their owner’s permission for them to travel into the interior, at first from a literate free black, and then from an unsuspecting young schoolboy. They also took along charms and obtained a talisman from a Muslim religious leader who had been exiled to the Cape from Batavia.[^1] They formed a close band, unified by their religious beliefs, swearing oaths of loyalty to each other and vowing to fight to the death. The bragging of one of them, and the qualms of another, unusually give a glimpse of the dynamics within such a band of runaways.

The band was aiming for the country of the Xhosa and managed to get as far as the Swellendam district, relying on food and shelter offered to them by unsuspecting colonists and Khoi,[^2] who were taken in by their possession of passes. Conflicts arose when they attempted to obtain possessions by force: in the case of the Khoi leading to their retaliation, in that of the colonists to a massacre on a Swellendam farm. Only then was the alarm raised and a group of Khoi sent to look for them.[^3]

[^1]: Norman (or Nuruman) van Marantu was 69 years old, and stated in his examination that he had been at the Cape ‘zedert nu een langen tijd zonder te weeten hoe lang en om welke redenen’ (for a long time now without knowing how long and for what reasons). He denied having practised as a ‘priester van de mahomet’ (priest of Mahomet/Mohammed), being widely known as such and giving advice to people who came to his house (CJ 424, ff. 555-56, articles 1-6), but clearly this was the suspicion of the authorities. The case provides a rare indication of the impact of a mystical form of Islam among Cape slaves in the eighteenth century, which has been little explored by historians, the exception being Bradlow 1988 and some suggestions for the early nineteenth century in Mason 2002. Davids (1990: 43-4) suggests that this Nuruman played an important role in Muslim religious life in the first decade of the nineteenth century after his release from Robben Island, when he went under the name of Paaij Schaapie d’ oude, although if his age in these documents is correct, he would by then have been over 90 years old. For a brief comment on the case, see Ross 1983: 20-1.

[^2]: The case provides an unusual indication of how unknown slaves who were believed to be on legitimate business were given hospitality on settler farms. The band was doubtless able in this way to obtain local information about colonists who were likely to have cash in their homes, a blacksmith and a trader.

[^3]: The documentation in the case includes the *eijsch*, the original pass letters, a letter written in Bugis (f. 703) (described in the inventory of the case documentation as being ‘een Arrabische’ letter and in the sententie as being ‘in Malay letters’) which was the charm Saripa got from Damon and in which the powders were wrapped, as well as correspondence from the Swellendam landdrost, the interrogations of the six accused, testimonies from the ‘Hottentot Capitein’ Adam Prins, his son Piet Prins and also the Khoi Piet Kaalkop and Jan Paerl, the latter of whom was later to become a renowned Khoi prophet (Viljoen 1994), and a list of objects stolen by the accused, CJ 424, ff. 687-878. There is also the examination of Norman (CJ 424, ff. 555-60) and of Johannes Jacobus Fabritius (CJ 424, ff. 563-69), along with a covering report from the fiscal, dated 16 November 1786 (CJ 424, ff. 545-53).
