---
doc_no: CJ 795
citation: Sententiën, 1782-1789, ff. 407-23.
---

# JOB VAN MADAGASCAR ET AL.

**CJ 795** Sententiën, 1782-1789, ff. 407-23.

Since Job van Madagascar, bondsman of the widow of the late *manhafte* Jan Hendrik Ekker, 30 years old at a guess, Moses van Bougies, slave of the burgher Jacobus Tesselaar, 40 years old at a guess, Francies van Mosambique, belonging to the burgher Simon van Blerck, 20 years old at a guess, Jek van Madagascar, bondsman of the burgher adjutant, *manhafte* Francois de Necker, 22 years old at a guess, Fortuijn van Madagascar, slave of the burgher Petrus Johannes Hiebner, 25 years old at a guess, Caesar van Madagascar, belonging to the former *koopman*, the honourable Johannes van Echten, 40 years old at a guess, and Brein van Ambon, a manumitted bondsman, 50 years old at a guess, currently their honours’ prisoners, have voluntarily confessed and since, from the other documents furnished in the case, it has appeared evident to the honourable Council of Justice of this government:

That fully two years ago now, the first prisoner, Job, joined a certain gang of slaves – among whom were two of the honourable Johannes van Echten, by the names of Said and Daniel, who were already punished at the beginning of the year 1785 for their misdemeanours, in accordance with the sentence of this Council[^1] – with the intention to go and steal sheep from the garden of the repatriated honourable Adriaan van Schoor, but at the barking of the dogs had to retreat again from there.

That the first prisoner, (so he says) from fear that this would be discovered, then set out in flight with his fellow slaves Jacob and the fifth prisoner, Fortuijn, and went to Table Mountain.

That thereupon two more slaves of the aforementioned Simon van Blerck, by the names of October and Jephta, likewise came to join the first prisoner. They then, being five in number, went to the region of Stellenbosch, where the aforesaid Jacob, Fortuijn and Jephta were shortly thereafter taken prisoner, which is when the first prisoner again returned with the aforementioned October to Table Mountain.

That later, when the first prisoner was joined by the slaves Mentor and Salomon, belonging to the aforementioned Van Blerk, and David, slave of one Franke, he decided at that time to go with them and the aforesaid October to Hanglip.

That the first prisoner found there at Hanglip several more runaway slaves and, after having maintained themselves for some time with shellfish as well as that which some of them brought to this hiding or dwelling place, he set out on a certain day with some people of this gang, along with a certain slave of one Louw, named Carolus, to the farm of the burgher Jan Otto.

That they stole there two horses from the stable and, notwithstanding their being chased by the aforesaid Otto, accompanied by one Wilkens, and the first prisoner also being hit by a shot of chopped bullets, brought these horses to their dwelling place and ate them.

However, that the first prisoner, because of this shot, became afraid to remain there any longer and, with the aforementioned David, Mentor and Carolus, separated from this gang and, after having roamed around elsewhere with these last-mentioned comrades, they again returned to Table Mountain. Although the said David, Mentor and Carolus, after having kept there for some while longer, went from him, there then also came to the first prisoner, apart from several other runaway slaves who were forever coming and going, the second, third and fourth prisoners, Moses, Francies and Jeck, as also the slaves Pedro of the aforementioned Van Blerck and April of the dragoon Veltbron.

That since then this gang always kept on Table Mountain, but the first prisoner mostly in the garden of the abovementioned honourable Van Echten, where he was principally provided with victuals and clothes by the sixth and seventh prisoners who, in addition, time and again, or most of the time in fact, hid him in a chicken coop next to the house of the aforementioned honourable Van Echten, and who also, when he got it into his mind to return to his owner, dissuaded him from it, by making him believe that everything that had been stolen from time to time would be put on his account, and that he would then perhaps be in danger of being hanged or broken on the wheel. During this time the first prisoner was able to go now and then to his gang, which stayed on Table Mountain during the day, but at night roamed around the gardens of Rondebosje and Roode Bloem[^2] to look for food since he was never able to bring as much food as would be sufficient for them all from the said garden \[i.e. Van Echten’s\].

That consequently, the aforesaid Pedro and April once drove a cow of the burgher Willem Versveld from the so-called Platte Klip to the mountain, where it was slaughtered by the first prisoner and thereafter consumed with the remaining second, third and fourth prisoners.

That after this, the first prisoner in addition stole, with the help of the third and fourth prisoners, Francis and Jek, a bull of the *manhafte* Servaas van Breda, and drove it to their hiding place for their maintenance.

Further, that the third prisoner Francies, together with the aforesaid Pedro, stole three sheep from the aforementioned Van Blerck and likewise three from the former burgher councillor, the honourable Jacobus van Reenen, and brought them, along with various garden fruit and vegetables, to the gang.

That the fifth prisoner, who had previously belonged to the owner of the first prisoner and had therefore known him ever since, often received the first prisoner during the night in his owner’s garden and provided him with food.

Next, that the fifth prisoner once told the first two prisoners, Job and Moses, that there were two bags of flour in the front room of his owner’s house, whereupon the four first prisoners deliberated with one another to take that flour from the house of the said Hiebner. To this end, the first four prisoners, in accordance with what they had agreed, went into the garden of Hiebner during the night of 8 and 9 August of this year, when the third and fourth prisoners remained at the gate of this garden, while the first two prisoners went to the house and, after having spoken with the fifth prisoner for a moment, returned again to tell the third and fourth prisoners, who had remained behind, that they now had an opportunity to get into the room. The first four prisoners then also went together to the house of Hiebner and to the window of the front room and found, in accordance with their instructions, the shutter open or only half closed, which they opened and then pulled up the sash-window, after which the first and second prisoners, Job and Moses, climbed inside. The fifth prisoner meanwhile, after having given the necessary directions, went to the back to see that the other slaves of his owner were all properly asleep.

That after the first and second prisoners with the help of the third prisoner had moved the two bags with flour from the room, the first prisoner Job then broke open with a garden rake the bureau standing in that room and, in addition to some silver work, also took from it all the money, both silver and paper, which was inside it; after which they took away numerous other goods which were in the room and of which the prisoners themselves were unable to list anything specific. However, on the morning of the following day, the aforesaid Hiebner missed from his bureau: fifty rixdollars in paper money, twenty six rixdollars in guilder coins, thirty rixdollars in old silver money, a double silver chatelaine bag with six precious coins, nine silver spoons, one silver sugar box, one silver cake tray with four spoons and five forks; while there also went missing that night from the room in which the bureau stood: two *mudden* of flour and a small copper tea chest; and from the back room where the washing is usually kept: one blue pocket-handkerchief, one empty canvas bag, one woman’s dress, one tablecloth, one men’s shirt, two women’s nightcaps and one canvas bag. These stolen goods were brought to the prisoners’ hiding place that very same night, yet most was found the following day by the lieutenant, *manhafte* Pieter van Breda, and the burgher Willem Versveld, when they went after the prisoners, and was returned to the said Hiebner.

That in the meantime the fifth prisoner pretended to his owner that he wanted to search for Job and his gang in order to deliver them into the hands of his owner; when he went from the house, joined the gang of Job and roamed around with them. After having remained with this gang for a month, and also stole fruit and vegetables from the gardens here and there, he again returned to his owner, claiming that he was trussed by Job and his comrades and held prisoner by them for all this time.

That the first four prisoners, shortly before they were taken prisoner, wanted to go again to Hanglip with the aforesaid Pedro and April, but that they got separated from one another in the dunes, and while the first and third prisoners returned again to Table Mountain, the second, third and fourth prisoners were apprehended, as also the first prisoner who, after many fruitless attempts had been made, was finally surprised in an accidental manner in the abovementioned chicken coop next to the house of the aforementioned honourable Van Echten; and, after having been hit with a shot in his legs, was also taken prisoner and, like his accomplices, delivered into the hands of justice.

Since such a wanton flight and theft cannot, under any circumstances, be tolerated in a country where law and justice are properly maintained, but should be punished most rigorously, as a deterrent to other similar malefactors.

Thus it is, that the honourable Council of Justice, serving today, having read and considered with attentiveness the written *crimineelen eijsch ende conclusie* drawn up and delivered for and against the prisoners by the interim fiscal, the honourable Gabriel Exter, in his official capacity, as well as having noted everything that served the case and could have moved their honours, practising justice in the name of and on behalf of the high and mighty Lords States General of the United Netherlands, and having judged the prisoners, is sentencing them with this: to be taken to the place where criminal sentences are usually executed here, there the first, second, third, fourth and fifth prisoners to be handed over to the executioner, the first prisoner to be exposed under the gallows with a rope around his neck, then the first, second, third, fourth and fifth prisoners to be tied to a stake and severely scourged with rods on their bare backs, whereupon the first and second prisoners are to be branded, and the first prisoner for the time of his life and the second prisoner for a time of five consecutive years to be confined, riveted in chains, on Robben Island, to labour there without wages on the honourable Company’s public works. Further the third, fourth and fifth prisoners to be riveted in chains for the time of three consecutive years and to be sent home to their owners like this, further the sixth prisoner, after having witnessed the aforementioned execution, to be whipped by the *caffers* and to be sent home to his owner and the seventh prisoner, after also having witnessed the execution, to be sent from here to the Indies;[^3] with sentencing all the prisoners to the costs and expenditure of justice, and denying the further or otherwise drawn-up *eijsch* and the *conclusie* taken by the Officer.

Thus done and sentenced at the Cape of Good Hope on 18 December 1786, as also pronounced in the Castle of Good Hope on the 23^rd^ of the same month and executed on the same day.[^4]

Let the sentence be done, \[signed\] C.J. van Graaff.

\[signed\] S. v. Echten, Johs. Smuts, J.M. Horak, W.F. v. Reede van Oudtshoorn, J.M. Bletterman, C.L. Neethling, C.G. Maasdorp, Cs. Matthiessen, G.H. Meijer, O.G. de Wet.

In my presence, \[signed\] C. van Aersen, secretary.

[^1]: Daniel van de Caab, Saijd van Java and Gree van Sambouwa were all sentenced on 6 May 1785 to be whipped, branded and sent to work in chains on Robben Island for desertion and theft, CJ 67, ff. 49-50.

[^2]: Roughly the region of modern-day Woodstock.

[^3]: As a free man, Brein van Ambon was treated differently from the others. Brein had arrived from Batavia and worked in the Company gardens. He strenuously denied having aided any of the other accused, or knowing that they were runaways or even ever having seen Job, CJ 424, ff. 675-81. In the absence of evidence against him, he could not be convicted, but the court clearly decided that he was more of a nuisance than he was worth and should be returned to Batavia.

[^4]: This was the sentence recommended in the *eijsch*, CJ 424, ff. 593-95 and it was recorded in the *regtsrollen*, CJ 68, ff. 209-10.