One night in 1735, several runaway Company slaves, who had been hiding for several months on Table Mountain, stole sheep from various farms and corrals in and around Cape Town. It is not clear whether they all belonged to the same group, but some were spotted by a slave shepherd and a* knecht *at one of the corrals and they were all captured by the* ratelwacht*, the night watch that guarded the town.

Table Mountain was a well-known refuge for runaway slaves throughout the eighteenth century.[^1] This case shows some of the ways in which they tried to obtain food in the town, and also the dangers they faced from the town militia, as well as slaves and* knechten *stationed on the properties they raided.

The court records for this case contain eight testimonies by all of those involved. Since they are all rather repetitive, we print four here: those of two of the accused, the Company-owned slaves Claas van de Caab and Kinsa van Madagascar, and those of the* knecht*, Jan Plat, and Januarij van Madagascar, a slave shepherd.[^2]

[^1]: See Ross 1983: 57-8 and Worden 1998/9: 86-7. For other examples in this volume, see 1737 Aron van Madagascar; 1755 Januarij van Bougies; 1760 Achilles van de West Cust et al.; 1786 Job van Madagascar et al.

[^2]: Kinsa van Madagascar was caught earlier and was sentenced on 4 November 1734 to be publicly whipped and branded and to work in chains on the Company works for twenty years, CJ 16, ff. 60-1 (his testimony was copied for the court in the later case, CJ 339, ff. 187-88). Claas was convicted together with his fellow slaves, Valentijn van de Caab, Marre de klijne van Madagasacar and David van de Caab, all of them Company-owned slaves. The first three were sentenced to be publicly whipped, branded and to work in chains for ten years, while David received a whipping and five years’ work in chains, CJ 17, ff. 44-5. The *eijsch* and testimonies from all of them are given in CJ 339, ff. 166-80 and testimonies were also collected from the soldiers Jan Plat and Hendrik Mels and from Januarij van Madagascar, ff. 181-86.