# NICOLAAS HEIJNS

*This is a case of a slave who was caught in the midst of a matrimonial dispute between her owners. Nicolaas Heijns hit Flora several times, causing severe wounds to her head, for reasons which were not clear to any of those who witnessed the scene. She complained to the authorities, and the supporting testimonies, which included those of Heijns’s son, seemed to back Flora’s claims. The fiscal was sympathetic, calling for Heijn’s punishment with a fine. But Heijns’s claims to the Court of Justice that his wife had put Flora up to making the complaint gave them pause for thought and Heijns does not appear to have been penalised.[^1]*

*The case contains some incidental details of interest, such as Flora’s job of selling almonds in the streets of Cape Town, a task at which she had little success,[^2] and her role of serving at table in the Heijns household.*

[^1]: Heijns was brought before the court on 13 February 1766, and claimed both that Flora ‘seer brutaal teegens mij geweest’ (was most insolent towards me) and that his wife had done everything in her power to oppose him, including inciting his slaves against him and encouraging Flora van Bengalen to make her complaint to the authorities. He produced a letter written to him by his wife, which was full of insults and curses (printed in Ponelis 1993: 79 and, in Afrikaans translation, in Schoeman 2002a: 76; Raidt 1994: 196 and 202 discusses its linguistic features). The court stated that this had nothing to do with the case, which was concerned with whether or not Heijns had maltreated Flora. Heijns admitted that he had hit her, ‘dog dat het in sijne drift geweest, en daarin door de assurantie dier slavin gebragt was’ (but that this was in anger and that he had been brought to it because of the insolence of this slave). The court held the case over, but there is no record that it came before them again, CJ 48, f. 25.

[^2]: See the discussion of *koeli geld* in 1718 Doulat van Balij, n. 6.