In this case eight slaves aimed to escape from the colony and to head for the ‘land of the Caffers’.[^1] The plan was initiated by a slave working as a charcoal burner in Hout Bay under the supervision of a slave* mandoor*,[^2] and he persuaded other Cape Town slaves to join him. The runaways stole a boat and headed first of all for Hangklip. But they encountered major problems of obtaining food, of an unseaworthy boat and were reported by a Khoi who saw their footprints on the beach.[^3]

[^1]: By this they meant the region of the Eastern Cape. For other examples of runaway slaves aiming to reach this area, outside the reach of the Cape authorities, see 1751 Januarij van Boegies et al. and 1760 Achilles van de West Cust et al.

[^2]: A slave appointed as an overseer over other slaves. For more details on this system, see 1768 Frans van Madagascar, n. 2.

[^3]: The *eijsch* and testimonies are in CJ 354, ff. 459-99. The testimonies of the eight accused are mostly very similar and repetitive, but we publish here those of Januarij van Boegies and Baatjoe van Samboua who between them relate the story, as well as that of Ds. le Sueur, who provides some details from the ‘other side’. The accused claimed in their defence that they ‘niet geweeten te hebben dat er in ’t weg neemen van den schuijt soo veel quaad stak’ (did not know that it was so wrong to take away the boat). They were sentenced to be whipped and to be returned to their owners to work in chains for three years, CJ 28, ff. 81-4. This was considerably milder than the death sentence recommended in the *eijsch*.