Slaves were often caught up in the domestic disputes of their owners. Michiel Lourich[^1] was clearly a violent man who both beat his wife and ordered his slave January to whip his female slave Diana, causing the latter’s death. The reasons for his abuse of Diana are not clear, but they may have been linked to his dispute with his wife, whom he had thrown out of the house[^2]. Fabricius, the Company soldier who was lodging at Lourich’s house,[^3] was clearly shocked by his behaviour, towards both his wife and Diana, and left the household.

The fiscal did not recommend a sentence, but the court decided that Lourich should be banished from the Cape ‘as soon as possible’ and sent back to the Netherlands at his own cost ‘as a useless subject’.[^4]

Included here are two testimonies, those of the lodger soldier Jan Fabricius, and that of one of Lourich’s slaves, Januarij, both of whom witnessed the events, as well as a report on the autopsy.[^5]

[^1]: Michiel Daniel Lourich was born in Germany and arrived at the Cape as soldier in 1727, served as loan *knecht* during 1730-31, and became a free burgher in 1734. In 1736 he obtained the *pacht* to sell malt beer for a year (Hoge 1946: 248-49 and Leibbrandt 1906: 670). In this case it appears that by 1740 he was running some sort of public house, with his slave having to wait upon people who were drinking there. The place was also a lodging house, hence Fabricius’s presence. Running lodging houses was one of the main occupations of Cape burghers in the eighteenth century (Worden et al. 1998: 57).

[^2]: She was Anna Catharina Biesel, born at the Cape, the daughter of Christiaan Andries Biesel and Aletta de Nijs. She married Lourich on 14 October 1736 and their only child, Johannes Georg, was the four-month-old baby who features in this case. (Heese & Lombard 1986-2004, vol. 1: 278). Mentzel, the contemporary writer on the Cape who stayed here between 1733 and 1741, was a friend of Lourich and had this revealing, though euphemistic, passage on their marriage: ‘He \[Lourich\] was married but he could not get on with his wife. They were both excellent people but their dispositions would not harmonise.’ He glossed over the reason for Lourich’s departure from the Cape, which is revealed in this case, and merely continued: ‘So they separated, and the man obtained the Governor’s permission to leave the Cape and return to his native place’ (Mentzel 1919: 138). It was as an indirect result of this case that Mentzel accidentally left the Cape: In January 1741 he went on board *Hartenlust* in order to deliver some letters to the banished Lourich who was returning to Europe on this ship. Mentzel spent the night on board but only awoke when the ship was already sailing away from the Cape (ships usually waited for a favourable wind and, when it did arrive, left immediately) (Mentzel 1919: 136-45).

[^3]: Fabricius was not stationed at the Cape (he does not appear in the Cape muster rolls for 1739 or 1740) and it is therefore likely that he was on one of the ships that was then in Cape Town harbour (possibly the *Hartenlust* which had arrived two days earlier, Bruijn et al. 1979, vol. III: 354) and that he was lodging with Lourich.

[^4]: The fiscal (unusually) did not recommend a sentence in the *eijsch*, although he commented that while a slaveowner was entitled to punish his slaves for ‘eenige fouten’ (any faults), he should not put them in chains, nor torture them without permission of the authorities, CJ 345, f. 579v. Although Lourich pleaded that ‘soo hij iets in deese gedaan heeft dat strafbaar is, dat hem sulx mag gepardoneert werden’ (if he had done anything in this matter that was punishable, that it should be forgiven), he was found guilty by the court of maltreating a slave and was sentenced on 1 December 1740 ‘omme … als een onnut subject van hier naar het vaderland verzonden te werden, met condemnatie in de costen’ (to be sent from here to the fatherland as a useless subject, with sentencing to the \[court\] costs), CJ 22, ff. 81-2.

[^5]: The documentation also includes Lourich’s interrogation, CJ 345, ff. 587-93.