April van de Caab ran away from his master but was obliged after some time to take up employment on another farm, passing himself off as a*Bastaard-Hottentot*.[^1] He was recognised by Khoi workers and returned to his master, but on the way back escaped and stabbed one of the Khoi.

The case reveals the problems faced by runaway slaves, and the complexity of their interactions with Khoi and other slaves whom they met when on the run. It is striking that April, as a locally born slave, did not attempt to leave the colony, as did many slaves who had known another life before being brought to the Cape, but rather stayed in the only region with which he was familiar.[^2]

[^1]: *Bastaard-Hottentot* was the name given to the offspring of Khoi and slave parents (Elphick & Shell 1989: 202). Those with slave fathers were not legally enslaved, since slave status descended from the mother, but many formed part of the labour force of the farming districts. In 1775, they were formally indentured until the age of 25. Their growing numbers from the middle of the eighteenth century made the authorities concerned that escaped slaves were able to pass themselves off as *Bastaard-Hottentotten,* as in this case, and they were made to carry passes, as were slaves and free blacks, when legally away from their place of employment (see 1786 Augustus van de Caab et al., n. 8). This was the basis of the notorious South African pass laws, Worden 1985: 58, 127; Shell 1994: 141, 267; and Penn 1999: 148-49. For other examples of slaves passing themselves off as *Bastaard-Hottentotten*, see Heese 1994: 106-7.

[^2]: The slow rate of creolisation (that is, the predominance of locally born slaves over imported ones) at the Cape meant that the large majority of slaves in the VOC period were outsiders and had known a life before enslavement. This changed, especially after the abolition of the slave trade in 1808, affecting the character of slave resistance: instead of running away to escape from the colony, slaves began to demand improvement of their condition, or outright freedom, within the Cape as the only world that they knew (for this argument in transatlantic slave societies in this period, see Genovese 1979; for the Cape, Ross 1983: 96-116).
