Spadilje was an unusual slave for two reasons: he came from Thailand,[^1] and he was owned by a free black.[^2] He also was a deserter, and met up with other runaways in the Hangklip area[^3] with whom he carried out a robbery on the Company* slagthuijs *in Simon’s Town. He attracted suspicion of being a runaway when he tried to use some of the stolen money at a nearby tavern.

[^1]: Only a very few slaves at the Cape came from Siam (modern Thailand). The VOC had a trading post at Ayutthaya, which flourished in the seventeenth century, was closed down in 1740 but had a brief revival in 1748-65 (Gaastra 2003: 124-25; Raben & Pombejra 1997: 74-5).

[^2]: Spadilje’s owner, Albert Isaaksz, was a free black, a term which usually referred to freed slaves, but also to the ex-*bandieten* from Asia, such as the Chinese. He was probably a former slave, since he was offered to the Council of Policy as surety by the burgher Gerrit Reijnders against the manumission of another slave in 1766 (Leibbrandt 1989: 970). Although many free blacks were too poor to own slaves, a number did so, sometimes acquiring their own relatives in order to manumit them (Elphick & Shell 1989: 221; Shell 1994: 121). Albert Isaaksz manumitted his slave Rosie and her three children in 1792, although it is not known if they were related to him (Leibbrandt 1989: 1525). For another example of slave ownership by a free black, see 1738 Pieter Coridon.

[^3]: For the Hangklip runaway slave community, see 1737 Aron van Madagascar.
