On 12 March 1736 a fire, which broke out in a Cape Town tannery, spread to five nearby houses and was only brought under control with difficulty. This and two other suspected arson cases in the town in the preceding few months alarmed the authorities. Here, the fiscal complains twice to the Council of Justice about the unruliness of slaves in Table Valley, and in particular in the gardens, or small vegetable plots, in and around the Cape Town settlement. In particular, he inveighed against owners who left their slaves without supervision, resulting in dangers ranging from desertion to theft and unattended household fires (the apparent cause of the recent conflagration). His warnings reveal the relative independence that could exist for urban slaves, but also the paranoia that the authorities had about unsupervised and uncontrolled slaves who were assumed to be plotting ‘villainous deeds’. The suspicion that the Cape Town fire might have been deliberately caused by slaves was proved in the following months, when a number of runaways from the deserter community at Hangklip were captured.[^1]

Numerous laws were passed to try and control the movement and independence of urban slaves, the frequency of which suggest that none were particularly effective.[^2]

[^1]: Ross 1983: 54 and 137 n.3. On the same day as the first document, 22 March, six Cape Town slaves were sentenced to a whipping and returned to their owners to work for a year in chains for ‘saamenrotting en gepleegde disorders’ (banding together and committing disorder), CJ 18, ff. 18-20, while on 26 April, the date of the second document, five other urban slaves were brought to court for ‘des nagts te vagabondeeren’ (roaming around at night), although they claimed that they had set out at 5 p.m., well before the curfew, and were searching for their owners’ pigs, CJ 18, ff. 32-4. There is no other documentation for this case and it appears that they were not sentenced. A regulation regarding accidental fires always formed part of the *generale plakkaten* which were periodically renewed. These cases happened shortly after the promulgation of a *plakkaat* specifically aimed at preventing this sort of accident, on 3 January 1736, see *Kaapse Plakkaatboek* II: 160-61 (cf. similar *plakkaten* in 1715, pp. 62-3 and in 1742, pp. 204-5).

[^2]: Most notably in the ‘slave code’of 1754, *Kaapse Plakkaatboek* III: 1-7 (1754). For others during this period, see article 51 of the general *plakkaat* of 1727 (*Kaapse Plakkaatboek* II: 119). There was also a specific *plakkaat* in 1708 to control the gathering together of slaves in the town, *Kaapse Plakkaatboek* II: 10-11. See also 1738 Pieter Coridon, n. 1.