---
title: SAMEL
citation: 1/STB 18/155 Notariële Verklaringen, 1706-1714, unpaginated.
---

There appears before the undersigned delegates from the *Collegie van landdrost en heemraden[^1] * the slaves: Coridon van Batavia, bondsman of the farmer in Drakenstein, Daniel Hugo, about 30 years old; Pieter van Madagascar, bondsman of the farmer Louis Heuris, who is about 22 years old; and Damon van Madagascar, bondsman of the farmer Francois Retieff, about 30 years old, all living in Drakenstein. Which slaves, without even the least coercion, voluntarily confessed how the slave of Pieter Erasmus, named Samel, came to them, the first two deponents, at the mill in Drakenstein, and told and encouraged them to run away. That they, the first two deponents, did not want to do that since they have good *basen* and are not in want of anything. The third deponent says that the aforementioned Samel also came to him at the house of his *baas* Francois Retieff, and likewise encouraged him to go to their country, but that he refused this, saying: “I have a good *baas* and mistress, why would I run away then?” That the aforementioned Samel said: “Then I will look for other *jongens*”. However, they all confess jointly that they have kept this a secret and have kept it hidden from their *basen*, without being able to give reasons why, except for: “We are to blame”.

Thus confessed in the chamber of council in Stellenbosch, in the presence of the honourable *heemraden* Jan Botma and Dirk Coetse who, together with the confessants and me, the secretary, signed the original.

Today, 3 October 1709.

This mark X Coridon has made.

This X Pieter has set.

This X Damon has made.

As delegates, \[signed\] Jan Botma, D. Coetse.

In my presence, \[signed\] Jan Mahieu, secretary.

[^1]: For an explanation of this, see the Introduction above, p. XX.
