This is an unusual and insightful case for a number of reasons.[^1] It concerns complaints by the labourers on a remote Roggeveld farm that their mistress, Christina Strang, had killed a slave. They only had the opportunity to do this when they accompanied their master, Jacobus Kruger, to Cape Town two years after the event. Strang was summonsed but denied the accusation, instead producing her own rather improbable version of what had happened. The Council of Justice fined her 50 rixdollars and ordered that Januarij van Ceijlon, the slave who had brought the complaint, be sold, with the stipulation that he should never again come into her possession or that of her children.[^2]

The case shows how the owners of a frontier farm, male and female, could act with impunity, both by killing a slave and by intimidating the others to keep quiet about the fact for several years. It includes other features of interest. The murdered slave was a newcomer from the East Indies and the evidence includes details of the problems he faced in adapting, including unfamiliarity with the work, language and dress, and the way in which he was viewed ethnically by the other slaves and their owners. One of the testimonies was by a young Khoi boy who would have been seven or eight years old at the time these events took place. It is noteworthy that two of the slaves and all of the adult Khoi had run away from the farm by the time the complaint could be brought to the authorities. Clearly, this was not a popular place in which to live and work.

[^1]: In addition to the material transcribed here, the documentation in this case includes a letter from the Stellenbosch landdrost to the Council of Justice and the testimonies of Jan Olivier and the slave Carel van Pang, CJ 381, ff. 29-47. Schoeman 2002a: 153-55 gives some background to the case and an Afrikaans translation of Christina Strang’s testimony.

[^2]: CJ 46, f. 26-7. It is noteworthy that J.J. le Sueur, the landdrost who had collected the testimonies, did not consider the evidence sufficiently clear to convict Strang, but nonetheless recommended that Januarij be sold away from her, CJ 381, f. 30v.
