---
title: CHRISTINA STRANG
citation: CJ 381 Criminele Process Stukken, 1764, ff. 32-5.
---

Statement given, on the requisition of the landdrost of Stellenbosch and Drakensteijn, *Sieur* Johannes le Sueur, by Januarij van Ceijlon, slave of the farmer Jacobus Kruger, of competent age, going as follows: That, as the testifier believes, more than two years, or two or three times,[^1] ago, when the testifier’s owner, who resides on his farm situated in the Bocke Veld, rode away from his house and, as the testifier supposes, set out to Stellenbosch to drill,[^2] the testifier and his fellow slave called Augustus – without the testifier knowing for sure of what nation he was but he suspects that he must have been a Batavian *jongen* as he was yellow in colour[^3] – had to labour, with the help of some Hottentots, on the building of a stone corral, the stones for which they had to search for in the vicinity and had to drag them there with oxen, while the aforesaid Augustus moreover also had to lead these draught oxen.

That as the aforesaid Augustus did not labour to the satisfaction of their mistress, who had remained at home, she came to them at about eleven o’clock in the morning of a certain day, without being able to say which, with a *kirrij* in her hand and then went to the aforementioned Augustus who just for a moment had gone to the side of a little straw hut and, as the testifier supposes, must have smoked tobacco there since it was then rather cold. The testifier, who was only standing about ten or twelve paces from there, then saw his aforementioned mistress beating the said Augustus everywhere, except on his head, with the *kirrij* she held in her hand, to such an extent that the hands of the aforementioned Augustus became heavily swollen as a result of the blows he received on them, being unable to say whether or not his arms, which were covered by his clothing, were also swollen heavily.

That the aforesaid Augustus, because of the pain from the blows he received, was not able to pick up heavy stones and, on top of that, the work was in any case difficult for him, consequently, whenever he saw his mistress coming towards them, he always carried small stones. When this was perceived by the testifier’s mistress, she again, after fully an hour or somewhat more had passed, again beat the same with the *kirrij* all over and even on his head, in such a way that this *jongen* fell down onto the ground and bled heavily from his head and moreover remained lying there. That he had to get up on the order of his mistress and again start working, but as he was unable to do so, the testifier’s mistress, who thought that this *jongen* was doing it from obstinacy, had his hands tied together with a *riem* by the testifier and then, while saying: “The fiscal doesn’t know as well as I do how to set you lot right”,[^4] had him lie down backwards, and thus with his back on a heap of stones, which had been brought together for the building of the corral, so that the protruding sharp edges of these stones caused this *jongen* pain, and had the aforesaid Augustus covered with a blanket and let him remain lying in this state for some time, without him knowing whether this was not more than an hour or two, after which the testifier, on the order of his mistress, again had to untie this *jongen*.

That the aforementioned Augustus was unable to work, but was not beaten any longer by the testifier’s mistress, although he remained with the *volk* working there until they had finished their labour, which is when the same, as best he could, went to the slave house, without the testifier knowing whether or not the said Augustus thereafter or during the late afternoon had gone to fetch water since, as the testifier was doing his work, he did not take note of that; as also whether or not, in so far as the testifier is aware or able to remember, there had been any stranger on the farm that afternoon or had remained there that night, since the testifier, as soon as he had come from his work, went to the slave house, from where one is only able to see the house of his owner from the back.

That when the testifier woke up at about midnight, he went to the fire place inside the slave house in order to start a fire as it was cold, which is when he found the slave Augustus, who had been lying next to it, lying dead, which the testifier reported, early in the morning, to the little children of the house since his mistress was still asleep.

That when the the testifier had finished the milking that morning, his mistress came into the slave house, looked at the dead slave and ordered the testifier and a grown Hottentot living there, by the name of Boegies, to just go and bury the aforesaid Augustus, which they also did. The testifier says that this Hottentot has since run away from there.

That two or three days thereafter, when a slave *jongen* of Jacob Cloete, the son-in-law of the testifier’s owner, by the name of Carel, came to the farm of his owner with a message, this *jongen* asked the testifier where Augustus was and, since they were of the same nation,[^5] the testifier narrated to this *jongen* how the said Augustus was so beaten by his mistress that he came to die of it, while adding that he wanted to go and complain about this.

That this *jongen* Carel told what he had heard from the testifier to the testifier’s mistress, and that when the testifier’s owner had been home for some time and the aforesaid Carel also happened to be on the farm, the testifier was tied with *riemen* onto the front wheels of a wagon in such a way that his body was lying on the shaft. The testifier was then asked by his owner what he had told Carel about *Nonje* and Augustus, to which the testifier said: “Nothing”, when the said Carel was called to it, and was asked by his owner whether or not the testifier had told him that his mistress had beaten the slave Augustus to death, and when this *jongen* answered to this: “Yes!”, the testifier’s owner whipped him with a double-plaited *riem* of oxen hide. When the testifier begged for the whipping to end, with the promise not to go and complain, his owner, while saying: “If you do not wish to go and complain any longer, but will keep quiet, then I won’t beat you any longer”, stopped the whipping.

That since, in the three years that the testifier had been living on the farm of his owner, this is the first time he had come to the Cape, he, fearing a similar fate, went to the honourable independent fiscal to complain and informed him of what had happened with the abovementioned Augustus.

There being nothing more to relate, the testifier asserts to be convinced of the accuracy of his statement as in the text, while offering to subsequently confirm the same.

Thus related in the Castle of Good Hope on 5 December 1763 in the presence of the clerks Pieter Caspar Broedersz and Frederik Wilhelm Alleman as witnesses, who have properly undersigned the original of this, as also the testifier and me, the secretary.

Which I declare, \[signed\] C.L. Neethling, secretary.

**CJ 381** Criminele Process Stukken, 1764, ff. 36-7.

Statement given, on the requisition of the landdrost of Stellenbosch and Drakenstein, *Sieur* Johannes Jacobus le Sueur, by the Hottentot Jantje, 10 or 11 years old at a guess, going as follows:

That the testifier lives with the farmer Jacobus Kruger on his farm situated in the Roggen Veld and that a long time ago now, without being able to specify this, when the aforesaid Kruger had set out to Stellenbosch to drill, and when the slaves January and Augustus, together with some grown Hottentots, who have since all run away from there, and the testifier with another little Hottentot named Danster were busy, on the order of the wife of the aforesaid Kruger, to collect stones and to drag them with oxen in order to build a corral with them, he saw the aforesaid wife beat the slave Augustus, because he did not labour to her satisfaction, with a *kirrij* on his arms, back and hands, in such a way that the hands of this slave became heavily swollen as a result of it.

That this slave was then able to do even less, and because of this was beaten a second time by the said wife, and, amongst other places, also on his head, so much so that it bled heavily and that the aforementioned Augustus came to fall down on the ground, and after having lain there for some time, again got up from the ground and started anew with his work. However, since he could not perform it, he said to his mistress, who was sitting not far from there, that he could not work, which is when she had the hands of this *jongen* tied together with a *riem* by his fellow slave Januarij, and had him lie down on a heap of sharp stones and covered with a blanket, and allowed him to remain like this. After some time, the testifier then saw this slave untied again, without being able to say exactly how he might have become free.

That the aforesaid Augustus then remained at work and also worked a bit with them, and afterwards, by evening, went to the slave house; not knowing if the same had gone into the house of his owner to fetch water, but he does know that the same Augustus passed away that night in the slave house. The testifier also declares that the aforesaid Augustus had always been rather sickly, or that he was suffering from swollen legs, and also: that on the very same night when Augustus died, there had been at the farm of his owner a strange man, being tall of person[^6] and having arrived by horse, who stayed over that night and departed again early in the following morning.

The testifier declares that, after his *baas* had been home again for some time, he saw the slave Januarij being tied to the front wheels of a wagon and being whipped with oxen *riemen* for having spoken about that which had happened concerning the slave Augustus.

There being nothing more to relate, the testifier asserts to be convinced of the certainty of his statement as in the text, while offering to subsequently confirm the same.

Thus related in the Castle of Good Hope on 5 December 1763 in the presence of the clerks Pieter Caspar Broedersz and Frederick Wilhelm Allemann, as witnesses, who have properly signed the original of this, as also the testifier and me, the secretary.

Which I declare, \[signed\] C.L. Neethling, secretary.

**CJ 381** Criminele Process Stukken, 1764, ff. 40-5.

Statement given, on the requisition of the landdrost of Stellenbosch and Drakensteijn, *Sieur* Jacobus Johannes le Sueur, by Christina Strang, wife of the farmer Jacobus Cruger junior, of competent age, going as follows:

That already two years ago this past October, without knowing the day or date, when the testifier’s husband had set out to Stellenbosch to attend the burgher drill and she found herself alone at home with his children on their farm named the Tondeldoos Fonteijn, situated in the Rogge Veld, she employed, during her husband’s absence, his two slave *jongens* Augustus and Januarij, as well as the little Hottentots Jantje and Danser, to drag along stones on a cattle skin, in front of which some oxen were spanned in, in order to build corrals with them.

That on a certain day, which the testifier is unable to name, it came to her knowledge that the aforesaid slave *jongen* Augustus, who had to lead the oxen, was becoming very lax in his work that morning, for which reason the testifier went to him and gave him one or two blows on his hands with a little piece or splinter of a stick, while saying: “Why do you not hold that rope properly and lead nicely?” After which she again went from there; saying that the aforementioned slave Augustus was still very *baar[^7] * and unskilled, and also being unable to speak a word of Portuguese but only Malay.[^8]

Further – without knowing whether or not it had been on the same day that the testifier had given the aforementioned Augustus the aforesaid two blows – when, in the late morning, the little Hottentot Jantje called out from the yard to the testifier sitting inside the house: “*Nonje*, look, Augustus does not want to lead!”, the testifier got up and went there, whereupon the aforesaid Augustus, as soon as she came close, took up a stone from the ground and, by lifting up his arm, made a sign as if he wanted to throw it at the testifier; nevertheless, he did not throw it, but dropped the said stone onto the ground as soon as the testifier had ordered the other slave *jongen*, Januarij, to take an oxen *riem* and to give the aforesaid Augustus a beating with it. However, the testifier is unable to say positively whether or not this slave, who was laid down on the ground, was tied up, but can say that he lay on the ground and received, on her order, six or seven lashes with the oxen *riem* from the slave Januarij, without though being able to know the number of lashes he received as she did not count them. After this, the aforementioned Augustus continued to perform his work that day, after first, however, filling a pipe with tobacco in the slave house and by pointing to the pipe and saying to one of the testifier’s children in Malay: “Little *baas*, go and fetch fire”, obtained the same, and then smoked the aforesaid pipe in the slave house.

That when the *volk* stopped working at midday and when they, as well as the aforementioned *jongen* Augustus, had eaten, the testifier saw that Augustus (who, both through his *baar*-ness, since they had not had this *jongen* for very long, and through his natural ignorance, had always been in the habit of hanging his blanket over his one arm, even though he had no shortage of clothes, and when it was cold or bad weather, he would drape it around his body) was inclined to sleep and asked him, as best as she was able to bring forth in an imperfect manner in Malay and Portuguese,[^9] if he would like to go and sleep, to which he answered: “Yes”; which she permitted this *jongen*, who then lay down close to or perhaps just besides a pile of stones and used a stone as pillow for his head and covered himself with his aforesaid blanket, without the testifier having given this *jongen* any more lashes, nor having lain him onto this pile of stones, and even less having tied him up.

That when this slave Augustus had been lying there for about an hour, he got up from the ground of his own accord, and again went to work with the other slave and the Hottentots, and continued with it until the *volk* had stopped for the day, without having received any more lashes. That afternoon, the aforementioned Augustus had been at least three times in the *voorhuijs* and was seen by the farmer Jan Gijsbert Olivier, who had just arrived there and slept there that night. Further, the said Augustus ate that evening with the other *volk* in one and the same little hut and went to sleep. The following morning, when the the testifier was still asleep, a little Hottentot by the name of Jantje knocked on the door up to two times, when he called to the testifier: “*Nonje*, Augustus is dead!”, to which she answered: “Oh, go away, Hottentot!”, whereupon the said Jantje continued: “Yes! Certainly, *nonje*!”, for which reason the testifier got up, went to the slave house and found the aforementioned Augustus lying naked, except for his trousers, and dead, after which the testifier had a grave dug by the slave *jongen* Januarij and the Hottentot Jantje and had the corpse of this *jongen* buried. As the testifier returned from the slave house that morning, the aforesaid Olivier met her in the door of her house, yet she does not know whether or not he had gone to the slave house, but she does know that she did not speak with this man over the death of the aforesaid Augustus, as the said Olivier also shortly thereafter departed and, also, that a Hottentot by the name of Frederik, who was then still with her, had shown this man the way. She had had the aforementioned Augustus buried without informing any of the neighbours, nor having had the corpse inspected, nor had she herself given a report of it to the petitioner, or had it done by anybody else.

The testifier finally declares that she did not hear from the slave *jongen* Carel, belonging to the farmer Jacob Cloete, that the aforementioned Januarij had told him the testifier had beaten the aforementioned Augustus to death; saying also that she does not know that the said Januarij had uttered these words to anybody else, so that he could not have received any punishment over such tales, but in fact because the aforesaid Januarij, according to the assertion of some Hottentots and slaves, apparently had poison with him; but about which neither the testifier’s husband, nor the field corporal Scholts, who lives in that area, could discover the truth.

There being nothing more to relate, the testifier asserts to be convinced of the truth of her statement as in the text, with the offer to subsequently confirm the same, if necessary.

Thus related in the Castle of Good Hope on 28 February 1764 in the presence of the clerks Pieter Caspar Broedersz and Frederik Wilhelm Alleman, as witnesses, who have properly signed the original of this, as also the testifier and me, the secretary.

Which I declare, \[signed\] C.L. Neethling, secretary.

[^1]: It is not clear what this refers to, other than a set period of time. Perhaps it was Januarij’s way of expressing a year.

[^2]: This refers to the obligation on all adult male burghers to attend militia drill. See 1744 Claas and Augustus n. 2.

[^3]: This is a rare indication of a slave’s perception of colour and ethnicity in the ethnically complex slave society of the Cape.

[^4]: An intriguing example of how the authority of the fiscal and the judicial system was viewed by burghers, especially those in the interior.

[^5]: An interesting indication that solidarity amongst slaves might have been influenced by shared identities, based on a common place of origin.

[^6]: This observation may reflect the fact that Jantje was a young boy.

[^7]: In the Dutch East Indies it was customary to refer to a newly-arrived person from Europe as *orang baru* (literally ‘new person’), while somebody who had been to the East Indies before was called an *orang lama* (‘long ago person’). From these Malay terms developed the use of the adjectives *baar(s)*, ‘raw, inexperienced’, and *oorlam(s)*, ‘practised, skilled, shrewd’ in Dutch. These words were used especially to describe sailors, but at the Cape eventually also came to be used for slaves (see Boshoff & Nienaber 1967: 147 and 466, and, for further examples, Scholtz 1972: 112-13 and 151).

[^8]: If, as stated, Augustus came from Batavia, he would have been used to Malay as a lingua franca, but it is interesting that the implication here is that he would eventually have picked up Portuguese at the Cape. On the use of Malay and Creole Portuguese as contact languages at the Cape and in the East Indies, see 1775 Moses van Bengalen.

[^9]: While there is copious evidence for the use of Creole Portuguese and Malay amongst slaves at the Cape during this period (see 1775 Moses van Bengalen), the extent to which these languages were known and used by colonists in their dealings with slaves is considerably less certain. In many cases, colonists clearly did not understand their slaves when they used these languages (for example, 1757 Baatjoe van Mandhaar). But this case gives intriguing examples of a colonist woman and her children being familiar with at least some rudimentary form of the languages, and raises the question if they picked it up during their interactions with the slaves. For a detailed discussion of this issue, see Franken 1953: 41-79, especially pp. 71-2 which specifically deal with this case.
